Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Mu r r ay  Hu n te r
Deep 
Corruption
T h e  e v o l u t i on  of  t h e  Ma l ay s i a n  D e e p  St ate
Murray Hunter
Murray Hunter
An Ovi Magazine Books Publication
      2023 Ovi Project Publication - All material is copyright of the Ovi magazine & the writerC
Ovi books are available in Ovi magazine pages and they are for free. 
If somebody tries to sell you an Ovi book please contact us immediately. 
For details, contact: submissions@ovimagazine.com 
or: ovimagazine@yahoo.com 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced 
into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior permission of the writer or the above publisher of this book.
Malaysia’s 
Deep Corruption
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Murray Hunter
Malaysia’s 
Deep Corruption
The evolution of the Malaysian Deep State
Murray Hunter
An Ovi Magazine Books Publication
      2023 Ovi Project Publication - All material is copyright of the Ovi magazine & the writerC
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
An introduction
Democracy to survive and fulfil its role to safe-
guard and protect the people, needs vengeful trans-
parency and transparency demands people who are 
willing to unveil all forms of corruption whatsoever 
deep they might go, whatever or whoever they might 
have infiltrate. 
Murray Hunter is a researcher, a researcher with 
an academic base who knows that despite the dark 
veils and obstacles, only facts and truths bring un-
derstanding not only of the damage done but also of 
the necessary solutions. 
Murray Hunter
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Malaysia is in a vital point. The world is changing 
fast and even a pandemic managed to put a crucial 
mark in this change. And while the world is chang-
ing Malaysia drowns in Symplegades, compressed 
between a corrupted political and social schemes 
and a venal dark state.
Murray Hunter’s research into Malaysian corrup-
tion goes deep into the ‘whats’ and ‘whys’ believing 
and hoping that they will lead to ‘hows’ Malaysia can 
jump over the deep dark obstacles that hold her back, 
and become the rightful player it deserves to be into 
the South East Asian geopolitical chessboard.
Ovi Magazine Publishing and I personally, always 
feel honoured to bring out a book from Murray 
Hunter, especially one that can be surgically impor-
tant to the future of democracy in Malaysia. 
Thanos Kalamidas
Murray Hunter
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Is there a Malaysian Deep State? 
What it looks like
There has been much discussion about the exist-
ence of a deep state within Malaysia. This essay looks 
at its components. The deep state is not a unified and 
coordinated mechanism. It is heterogeneous and di-
verse. It is probably only bound together by a com-
mon narrative, sometimes interpreted differently. 
At different points of time, different aspects of this 
deep state exercise more power over the others. Oth-
er times, there is even conflict between the various 
elements.
Below is a description of what Malaysia’s deep state 
may look like.
Murray Hunter
The Special Branch
Malaysia’s Special Branch, a secretive division 
within the Royal Malaysian Police force (PDRM), 
has functioned as one of the country’s most covert 
units, or did until earlier this year, when the human 
rights NGO Suhakam accused it of being behind the 
disappearance of two social activists, Amri Che Mat 
and Pastor Raymond Koh.
The new Director General of Police, Abdul Ha-
mid Bador, denies the accusation, claiming that the 
unit has no operational capabilities. Nonetheless, the 
accusation shines a light on a shadowy organization 
that had its beginnings as an intelligence unit estab-
lished by the British after WWII to primarily gather 
human intelligence (HUMINT) on the communist 
insurgency throughout North Borneo and Malaya 
as well as spying to counter the growing Communist 
influence as well as watching the Singaporean trade 
union and political movements. A third important 
task was to undertake surveillance and infiltrate the 
Chinese triads operating in the towns throughout 
Malaya.
As a colonial creation, it has never been legiti-
mized by act of Parliament, It has, no public charter, 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
and reports neither to the National Parliament or the 
executive. It became an arm of the police organiza-
tional structure with a director who reported to the 
Director General of Police (IGP). The only indica-
tion of its mission and objectives are on the police 
website, stating that it is  “responsible for collecting 
and processing security intelligence to preserve the 
law and order of the public and maintain Malaysia’s 
peace and security.”
Today it conducts surveillance, intelligence gath-
ering, and infiltrations that span all aspects of Ma-
laysian society including religious organizations, 
mosques, churches, and temples, Chinese schools, 
universities, the state and federal civil services, gov-
ernment agencies, local government, trade unions, 
NGOs, media organizations, social activists, and 
even Royal households.
Special Branch attends many public gatherings, 
press conferences, and events where there are people 
of interest. Both opposition and government mem-
bers of parliament are kept under surveillance. It has 
expanded from just utilising HUMINT gathering 
and now utilizes all the tools of modern electronic 
intelligence gathering, with sophisticated cyber abil-
ities.
Murray Hunter
A former officer who wants to remain anonymous 
told Asia Sentinel writer that during the first Ma-
hathir era in the 1990s, his responsibility was to film 
and photograph cabinet ministers and state chief 
ministers in compromising situations which could 
be utilized as a lever against them if necessary at 
some future point. The ex-officer went on to say that 
a number of guest rooms in hotels around Malaysia 
have been set up for this specific purpose, making 
it intriguing that recently Mohamed Azmin Ali, the 
former Selangor chief minister and current minister 
of economics, was allegedly surreptitiously filmed in 
a homosexual liaison by unknown actors.
Politicians from Sabah and Sarawak are of par-
ticular interest due to the sensitivities about succes-
sion from the Federation. Just recently Parti Warisan 
Sabah, a member of the Pakatan Harapan govern-
ment, announced publicly that they would ban SB of-
ficers from their press conferences. However, Abdul 
Hamid Bador, formerly the agency’s director, said it 
is the SB’s prerogative to send in their people to press 
conferences despite the ban.
The unit has even been involved in royal house-
hold politics, choosing sides in a  power struggle 
within the Kelantan Royal household in 2010 by re-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
portedly ambushing the then-Sultan Ismail Petra on 
the road to prevent him from travelling to Singapore 
for medical treatment and restrained him in hospital.
The SB’s Political Division monitors the political 
climate and regularly undertakes its own polling. 
Its officers actually knew that the Najib government 
would most likely lose GE14 when that was by no 
means clear to political analysts. However, we will 
never know what role it played during the election 
and transition.
However, the warning that Abdul Hamid Bador 
gave to Najib when he was dismissed as deputy di-
rector and mothballed within the Prime Ministers 
Department before the election may in retrospect be 
very telling. The Political Division conducts propa-
ganda and misinformation campaigns.
During the first trial of opposition leader Anwar 
Ibrahim for sodomy, the then director Mohamed 
Said Awang told the court the Special Branch had 
conducted  ‘turning over operations’  to change the 
political views of targets. Wikileaks revealed corre-
spondence between Australian and Singapore secu-
rity agencies in which the Singapore agency told the 
Australian agency that the allegations against Anwar 
were true and result of a ‘honey trap’ set up.
Murray Hunter
Activities are not restricted to Malaysia. Officers are 
found in countries where Malaysians are studying in-
cluding Australia, New Zealand, UK, Germany, Ire-
land, the United States, and Egypt. SB officers mon-
itor the activities of Malaysian students and also use 
the opportunity to groom and recruit potential in-
formants, where those students on scholarships will 
be future civil servants. Officers usually work inde-
pendently of Malaysian consular missions, although 
some officers may either work within the consulates 
or are the consul in charge of student affairs.
The SB also  operates in Thailand, especially the 
southern provinces. Another SB officer who also 
wished to remain anonymous told me the main fo-
cus in Thailand was to monitor Malaysian criminals 
and Islamic sects with Malaysian connections. The 
officer also said that if the SB wanted to capture their 
targets, they would abduct and take them straight 
across the border. These extrajudicial renditions are 
usually carried out on those wanted in Malaysia and 
using Thailand as a safe haven.
The Malaysian and Singaporean special branches 
(ISD) have very close relationships. A Malaysian of-
ficer once told me the Singapore SB are “their broth-
ers,” which allows Malaysian SB influence to flow 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
down into Singapore. Time Magazine reported that 
the Malaysian special branch knew Sarawak Report 
editor Clare Rewcastle Brown had planned to vis-
it Singapore and had arranged for their Singapore 
counterparts to arrest her upon arrival.
The SB uses the Security Offences (Special Meas-
ures) Act 2012 (SOSMA) which replaced the infa-
mous Internal Security Act (ISA) as a platform to 
arrest and interrogate people of interest. Although 
hundreds of suspected terrorists have been arrested 
and held under SOSMA, the Act has also been used 
to arrest and hold civil rights activists, including Ma-
ria Chin Abdullah of Bersih.
This is purely political. Other detainees under 
SOSMA/ISA have included politicians Anwar Ibra-
him, Lim Kit Siang, Jeffrey Kittingan, Karpal Singh, 
Michael Jayakumar, Lim Guan Eng, Mohamed Sabu, 
and Teresa Koh.
According to ex-detainees the special branch 
methods to interrogate suspects include stripping 
them, forcing them to stand for long periods of time 
in the cold, intimidation, threats against families, 
isolation in spotlights or darkness, sleep, food and 
water deprivation, ‘good cop, bad cop’ routines, and 
truth drugs. The aim is to make the detainees com-
Murray Hunter Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
pletely dependent on their captures to break them 
down mentally.
Detainees have no right to lawyers, no right to ju-
dicial review, or other legal recourse. The SB itself 
has no known system of checks and balances, which 
leads to abuse. The 2005 Dzaiddin Royal Commis-
sion into Police Reform found that many SB actions 
fall outside the law. Interrogations also contravene 
the 1984 UN Convention Against Torture, a treaty 
which the Malaysian government has refused to rat-
ify.
Mahathir as Prime Minister has always been close 
to the Special Branch. In 1987 he cracked down on 
his critics in what was known as Operation Lalang, 
rounding up more than 100 politicians, social activ-
ists, academics, students, artists, and people seen as 
being critical of the government. The prime minis-
ter’s hold over the unit is just as strong today with his 
staunch ally Abdul Hamid Bador, the newly appoint-
ed IGP. Mahathir in support of the SB was dismissive 
of Suhakam’s findings about the abduction of Pastor 
Koh.
This is in stark contrast to former Prime Minister 
Najib Razak’s experience. Suspicious of the SB is that 
it built its own security apparatus from the Malay-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
sian External Intelligence Organization, known as 
ME10. Building ME10 up to more than 1,000 opera-
tives, Najib bypassed the SB. The charges against the 
former Director-General of ME10 Hasanah Abdul 
Hamid for misappropriation of election funds can be 
seen as payback for the letter she wrote to the CIA 
before Najib lost the federal election last year.
Today, the SB has a budget of more than RM500 
million, which doesn’t include the slush funds it 
has to run secret and sensitive operations. Over the 
last decade SB staff have more than doubled to over 
10,000. This doesn’t include 10-15,000 informers that 
the SB is handling across the country. This represents 
about one SB operative to 1,500 citizens, a ratio not 
unlike the old East German secret police, the Stasi.
Rather than use sodomy to destroy an adversary 
of Mahathir, ironically the SB is now using misin-
formation dissemination, aka ‘deepfake’ to protect a 
Mahathir ally. Many more clandestine operations to 
handle the transition are certain to follow.
The SB is now in the hands of a person who has 
used it before to blackmail, silence, incarcerate, and 
detain his critics. If Malaysia aspires to be a true de-
mocracy, then the SB is totally out of control. Who 
Murray Hunter Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
is a subversive or terrorist is left for the SB to de-
cide. Extra-judicial abductions are unconstitutional. 
Many detainees have been prisoners of conscience or 
prisoners for their religious beliefs.
The Monarchy
The investiture of Pahang Sultan Abdullah Sul-
tan Ahmad Shah as Malaysia’s 16th Yang di-Pertuan 
Agong, or King, shined a light on one of the world’s 
most unusual royal institutions, with the county’s 
eight sultans and one Raja rotating the kingship be-
tween them every five years.
The institution is based on nine old Malay states 
that came together with two of the Straits Settle-
ments, Melaka and Penang, (and later with Singa-
pore, which was expelled in 1965), Sabah and Sar-
awak to form the Federation of Malaysia. Official 
histories of the royal families have been shaped to 
show the monarchs as heroic and legendary.
Malaysian royalty is technically a constitutional 
monarchy. Yet the monarchy is at the apex of an an-
cient Malay class-based authoritarian feudal system 
with all its artefacts, ceremonies, customs, and lan-
guage. To some degree, Malaysia can still be seen as a 
patriarchy rather than a democracy.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
There is occasional criticism of royal behavior. Ma-
hathir during his first stint as prime minister used 
public sentiment to limit their powers in the 1990s. 
However, there is very little public questioning the 
legitimacy of the royal institution today, even though 
considerable government expenditure is required to 
maintain the monarchy.
The Malay monarchy is embedded deep within the 
Malay psyche, giving them patriarchal authority. The 
sultan is head of Islam in each respective state as well 
as defender of Malay and indigenous rights. The rise 
of Ketuanan Melayu narratives after the New Eco-
nomic Policy was introduced has strengthened the 
monarchy’s position even more.
There is a degree of absolute power in the hands of 
the monarchs that doesn’t devolve to other constitu-
tional royal families. They can appoint a chief min-
ister from their respective state assemblies without 
their picks being tested. They have used these pow-
ers to appoint the chief minister they want over the 
candidate from the largest party or coalition in the 
state assembly.  Terengganu in 2008  saw a political 
impasse when the sultan insisted that Ahmad Said 
be chief minister over UMNO’s choice Idris Jusoh. 
In Perlis in 2009 the Raja refused to swear in Sha-
Murray Hunter Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
hidan Kassim as chief minister and swore in Md Isa 
Sabu instead. In Selangor 2014 in what was called the 
Kajang move, the Sultan refused to appoint then-op-
position leader Anwar Ibraham’s wife Wan Azizah 
as chief minister, picking Azmin Ali even though he 
didn’t have apparent support from the majority of 
assembly members. In Perlis 2018 the Raja swore in 
Azlan Man as chief minister, even though the cere-
mony was boycotted by assembly members who sup-
ported Ismail Kassim.
This also extends into advice from the chief minis-
ter where in 2009 the Perak Sultan refused then chief 
minister Nizar Jamaluddin’s request to dissolve the 
assembly after three members of his government de-
fected.
In addition to appointing the chief minister, Sul-
tans also have the right to appoint top civil serv-
ants. In 2011 the Sultan of Selangor  confirmed the 
appointment of Muhammed Khusrin Munawi as 
Chief Secretary even though the then Chief Minister 
Abdul Khalid Ibrahim and his executive council op-
posed the appointment. The Agong delayed affirma-
tion of Tommy Thomas as Malaysia’s Attorney Gen-
eral and the Chief Justice for more than two months.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Bakri Musa was critical on the role of the Agong in 
the transition after GE14 which left Malaysia without 
a government for a number of days when the swear-
ing in of Mahathir as Prime Minister was delayed.
The monarchy’s influence over the political are-
na extends well beyond appointments. The govern-
ment had to back down on ratifying the Rome Stat-
ute when the Johor Sultan argued that the treaty on 
crimes against humanity, genocide, and war crimes 
would undermine Islam, the Malays, and the mon-
archy.
The Johor Sultan ordered the state assembly to ban 
e-cigarettes  in 2015 and  unilaterally banned vap-
ing in Johor in 2016.
The monarchy has enormous informal power. Sul-
tans hold regular weekly meetings with their exec-
utive councils, providing an opportunity each week 
to give views on the running of the state to the chief 
minister and executive councilors. Insiders have told 
Asia Sentinel that Sultans are generally very forth-
right on what they think is best for the state.
Sultans make regular visits to federal and state gov-
ernment departments, agencies, universities, schools, 
colleges, police and military stations, mosques, and 
Murray Hunter Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
organized events around their states meeting with 
politicians, civil servants, academics, police, military 
personnel, and people generally. Most also hold both 
formal and informal sessions at the palace where 
state business is often discussed in small informal 
groups. They ensure civil servants know their line of 
thinking, which sometimes is much more powerful 
than directives given by the state executive.
The majority of members within the civil service 
are very loyal. In each state a select group of civil 
servants, academics, medical doctors, police, mili-
tary form what is called by insiders as the “A Team”. 
These groups are very fond of royalty. Each member 
personally knows the sultan and his family members 
on a close personal basis. These “A Teams” network 
through common alumni such as the elite Malay 
College in Kuala Kangsar which extends nationwide 
with people who share the same sense of purpose.
The Sultans are also patrons of traditional Malay 
martial arts or silat organizations in which members 
have cross-memberships with Malay rights organi-
zations such as Perkasa, and Perkida. Organizations 
like Perkasa were opposed to the ratification of the 
UN International Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) on the 
basis that it would threaten Malay rights.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Section 44 of the constitution places the Agong 
beside the Senate and House of Representatives 
with responsibility for legislative power. Some loyal 
groups see the Sultan as the absolute law, more trust-
worthy than politicians who come and go. Article 
153 of the Constitution gives the Agong the power to 
safeguard the position of the Malays (and indigenous 
peoples). A strong sense of Malay identity maintains 
the traditional feudal cultural environment which 
has a long history.
This is a continuation of the long-standing social 
contract between the Sultan and the Rakyat (people), 
something that existed long before the formation of 
Malaysia. This can’t be seen at a national level but is 
extremely important at the state level.
Thus, in the eyes of many government servants, 
loyalty to “Tuanku” overrides loyalty to the demo-
cratically elected government.
The Agong is also the Commander in Chief of 
the Malaysian Armed Forces. Sultans hold military 
ranks, are ceremonial commanders of military reg-
iments, chancellors of universities, and patrons of 
various organizations.
Traditionally Prime Ministers have been lenient 
with the monarchy. The first Prime Minister was a 
Murray Hunter Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
member of the Kedah Royal Household. Both Na-
jib Razak and Abdullah Ahmad Badawi tended to be 
subservient and allowed the monarchy a lot of busi-
ness concessions.
Anwar Ibrahim has placed importance on building 
his relationships with the royal households since his 
release from jail last year. He also wants the Federal 
Court to declare null and void the Federal Consti-
tution provision that allows bills to be automatically 
passed as law in 30 days, without the King’s assent. 
Mahathir brought in this provision to curb Royal 
power in 1994.
The Malaysian Communication and Multimedia 
Commission (MCMC)  actively watches social me-
dia for any criticism of the monarchy. The Sedition 
Act which Pakatan Harapan promised to abolish is 
being used as a proxy lese majeste. Islamic preach-
er Wan Ji Wan Hussin recently had his jail sentence 
increased on appeal for criticising the Sultan of Selan-
gor seven years ago. Ahmad Abdul Jalil was arrested 
for allegedly ridiculing the Sultan of Johor through 
social media. Constitutional Law Professor Abdul 
Aziz Bari was pressured to resign his university po-
sition and received death threats after he made com-
ments about the monarchy. The police generally in-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
timidate anybody who discusses the monarchy by 
hauling them up for questioning as the recent Fadiah 
Nadwa Fikri case shows.
PKR parliamentarians are still calling on the po-
lice to investigate alleged seditious comments in the 
press discussing royalty. The Pakatan Rakyat Gov-
ernment is  planning even more draconian legisla-
tion that will provide even harsher penalties for crit-
icism of the monarchy.
The monarchy is the nexus between the  state Is-
lamic apparatus and the Special Branch and has been 
able to push back criticisms of JAKIM and calls for re-
forms. After the Mahathir era, the monarchy should 
be able to return to the understanding it has with the 
Special Branch, particularly with the numerous peo-
ple they have nurtured into the force’s rank and file.
How much power and influence the institution 
will yield will greatly depend upon the nation’s social 
and political evolution. A lot will depend upon how 
future Royals conduct themselves behind the scenes 
and present themselves in public.
The Islamists
Soon after Mahathir Mohamed became Prime 
Minister in 1981, he embarked upon bringing Is-
Murray Hunter Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
lam into Malaysia’s government. He opened an Is-
lamic university, started an Islamic banking sector, 
strengthened Islamic jurisprudence and centralized 
Federal Islamic affairs under the Prime Minister’s 
Department.
Thirty-eight years later, that has created an unas-
sailable Islamic bureaucracy that is independent of 
the executive branch, with their own sources of funds 
in addition to federal and state budget allocations. 
Elected governments, even under a new reformist 
Pakatan Harapan coalition that drove out the United 
Malays National Organization and the component 
parties of the Barisan Nasional, do not dare to cut 
down the size of the Islamic bureaucracy due to the 
potential political outcry that would follow from ul-
tra-Malay-Islamic groups across the country.
This is a radical change from the country at its 
birth in 1957, when Tunku Abdul Rahman, who 
loved horse-racing and Scotch whiskey, was the head 
of state and entertainers like P Ramli dominated the 
movies whose audiences included miniskirted teen-
agers.
With or without Mahathir, the Islamic resur-
gence began in the early 1980s where ethnic Malays, 
thrilled with the Islamic wave created by Ayatollah 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Khomeini that humiliated the west in Iran, were 
becoming much more religious, with Malay social 
codes becoming much more observant of Islam. 
More women began covering their heads, Arabized 
dress started becoming synonymous with Islam and 
the Malay language itself was becoming Arabized.
An astute Mahathir saw this being translated into 
growing support for the rural-based Parti Islam 
se-Malaysia or PAS. In 1982 Mahathir recruited the 
popular Anwar Ibrahim, who was president of the 
Malaysian Islamic Youth Movement (ABIM) into his 
party UMNO to strengthen his Islamic credentials. 
Anwar moved through the senior political ranks very 
quickly, becoming Youth & Sports Minister in 1983, 
Agriculture Minister in 1984, Education Minister in 
1983, Finance Minister in 1991, and finally Deputy 
Prime Minister in 1993.
Mahathir was able to decimate PAS in the 1986, 
leaving them with only one parliamentary seat al-
though PAS rebounded and wrested the Kelantan 
state government from UMNO in the 1990 general 
election and has ruled it since.
The  Malaysian Constitution  specifies that Islam 
is the official religion of the nation, although free-
dom of religion is also supposedly guaranteed. In 
Murray Hunter
addition, under the constitution, ethnic Malays can-
not convert to any other religion unless the Sharia 
Court grants permission, which is unheard of. Islam 
is a matter for the states to regulate and each head 
of state, raja or sultan is also the leader of Islam. The 
Yang di-Pertuan Agong or king is the head of Islam 
in the Federal Territories and states which don’t have 
a royal head of state.
As Islam is a state responsibility, each state has 
a  Multi Department  which issues fatwas based on 
interpreting the Quran, Hadiths, and Sunna, main-
tains mosque operations, and identifies and controls 
the spread of deviant Islamic teachings. State Islamic 
Departments are responsible for family law, mosque 
maintenance, Sharia enforcement, education, and 
general Islamic affairs. Each state will also have an 
agency and Islamic foundations which invest in Is-
lamic insurance, Islamic education, and the spend-
ing of Zakat monies. The operations of these business 
arms are substantial, and the control of Zakat monies 
creates massive outreach into the community.
Although each state government has an executive 
council member responsible for Islamic affairs, the 
Mufti and State Islamic Departments tend to run au-
tonomously without political interference.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
During Mahathir’s first tenure, the Division of 
Islamic Affairs was upgraded to the Islamic Devel-
opment Department of Malaysia (JAKIM). With a 
Director-General in charge, JAKIM became respon-
sible for Islamic affairs in all Federal Territories. 
JAKIM’s aim was to maintain the purity of Islam and 
Islamic teachings, coordinate law enforcement, and 
oversee Halal regulation. Within JAKIM is the Na-
tional Fatwa Council made up of state Muftis and an 
additional five Islamic Scholars selected by the Con-
ference of Rulers. Once a fatwa was approved by the 
Conference of Rulers and gazetted, it becomes legally 
binding within the Federal Territories.
Fatwa decisions are  based upon the principle of 
collective decisions  (Shura) of the Fatwa Council. 
They are opinions based upon the Islamic texts and 
advice given to the council. In effect, Fatwas cannot 
be challenged although there have been many cases 
of contradictory fatwas issued by various councils, 
where on occasion they have also been contradictory 
of the Federal Constitution.
JAKIM and the state religious departments 
have  strong connections with the police. This rela-
tionship is outside the control of ministers and state 
executive councillors. The Selangor Islamic Depart-
Murray Hunter
ment (JAIS), for instance, conducted raids with the 
police  in 2014 on the Malaysian Bible Society that 
were embarrassing for the then-opposition Pakatan 
state government in Selangor.
These massive state and federal bureaucracies are 
directed by unelected bureaucrats and muftis. Their 
modus operandi based their interpretations upon the 
Quran, Hadiths, Sunna, and Fiqh texts, which cannot 
be challenged. The royal connection due to the Sul-
tans and Yang di-Pertuan Agong being the heads of 
Islam takes away any accountability. Any attack upon 
the actions of the Islamic bureaucracy can easily be 
deemed an attack upon Islam and royalty itself.
This tenure with royalty is also mutually serving 
both parties’ interests. State Religious Departments 
and the rule of ‘Islam’ are protected by Royal patron-
age and royalty is protected by its position as the 
head of Islam.
The nexus here is Islam-Royalty-Malay Rights 
which is a completely unchallengeable platform, en-
abling agendas to be carried out that are not even 
trusted to the political parties of the country. This is 
the core of the deep Islamic state within Malaysia. A 
massive group of civil servants is loyal to this philos-
ophy rather than flag and modern nationhood. This 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
is an almost unmovable barrier to any sense of sec-
ularism.
This deep Islamic state is ever increasing its pow-
ers, aided by the previous deeply corrupt government 
headed by Prime Minister Najib Razak, who saw in 
embrace of religion a bulwark against a secular in-
surgency spearheaded by the opposition. It worked 
for a long time.
Imams in mosques have long been forbidden to 
present their own speeches for Friday prayers as 
they are forced to read state prepared texts. JAKIM 
stopped non-Muslims using the Arabic word ‘Allah’ 
in 2007. JAKIM treats the LGBT community as devi-
ant. The deep state prevented the federal government 
ratifying the ICERD treaty on anti-discrimination. 
JAIS acted against a forum on Malay women’s rights 
to not wear the hijab. Now JAKIM is opening a new 
special unit to investigate insults to Islam.
The disappearance of Pastor Raymond Koh in 
2017  was found by the Malaysian Human Rights 
Group Suhakam to have been undertaken by the 
state. The further disappearances of Pastor Joshua 
Hilmy and his wife Ruth, converts away from Islam, 
and that of Amri Che Mat, a Muslim activist abduct-
ed by masked men in SUVs in Perlis, remain unex-
plained. Mahathir remains publicly unperturbed.
Murray Hunter
This Islamic state has turned Islam into an author-
itarian and totalitarian tool for control of peoples’ 
daily lives. Malaysia has become a pseudo-theocracy 
where anyone with opposing views will be pursued 
and prosecuted. Anybody giving a talk on Islam re-
quires a permit.
Soon after the Pakatan Harapan victory last 
year,  calls by a group of eminent Malays known as 
the G25 were made to the Conference of Rulers to 
review the functions of JAKIM. This was resisted. 
Mahathir announced in July 2018 that there would 
be an inquiry into the functions of JAKIM and was 
attacked by the Malay Rights group Pemantau Ma-
laysia Baru, led by Lokman Noor Adam. Until now 
there is no sign of any report.
When Pakatan Harapan first came into office, Mu-
jahid Yusof Rawa, the minister responsible for Islam-
ic affairs, tried to reel in JAKIM’s enforcement activi-
ties, but after criticisms have backed off. Islam mixed 
with politics and the philosophy of  Ketuanan Mel-
ayu  (Malay supremacy) has brought many skewed 
discussions about Islam.
There were other strong forces, an influential fifth 
column led by Perlis Mufti, Dr Mohd Asri Zainul 
Abidin, popularly known as Dr Maza, with a close 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
relationship to both Perlis politician Shahidan Kas-
sim and the royal household. This influence blos-
somed under the PH time in government. Prime 
minister Muhyiddin Yassin met with Dr Maza be-
fore forming his cabinet, seeking support of a group 
called the Alumni, made up of graduates from local 
and Middle Eastern universities in Saudi Arabia and 
Jordan, as well as UK graduates, who return home 
and join the civil service, armed forces, religious or-
ganizations, schools, and universities, some of whom 
now enjoy prominent positions. They dominate the 
Fatwa Councils, JAKIM, and some state religious 
administrations. Many within the alumni are highly 
intelligent, articulate, well educated, well connected, 
and don’t necessarily disclose their true beliefs and 
inclinations in the interests of exerting influence 
over other peoples’ ideas. This group also protects 
the image of the movement. According to a MAIPs 
insider, every member of the alumni is given a dak-
wah  allowance of RM5,000 per month, increasing 
over time, which is in addition to the salaries they 
earn in their employment, primarily funded by Saudi 
monies.
Their influence can be seen with what former edu-
cation minister Maszlee Malik did within Malaysia’s 
education system, i.e., appointing Salafi sympathiz-
Murray Hunter
ers and members of Pertubuhan Ikram Malaysia 
to important public university posts, until former 
prime minister Mahathir Mohamed sacked him. 
Like Maszlee, the current minister within the Prime 
Minister’s Department for Religious Affairs, Zulkifli 
Mohamad Al-Bakri, according to a number of sourc-
es has strong leanings towards this group.
National debate about important Islamic issues is 
strongly inhibited. Issues relating to ethics, social 
justice, equity, corruption, the alleviation of poverty, 
education, and racial tolerance from any Islamic per-
spective are glossed over in favor of more trivial is-
sues that hold the Malaysian narrative captive today.
Within this framework there is little real debate re-
garding social, spiritual, and the economic evolution 
of what Malaysia should be. The paradox is that there 
is actually little Islamic influence upon policy and 
decision-making within administrative government. 
The agenda and tight grip on bureaucracy and the 
executive are too hard to undo. Both Anwar and Ma-
hathir helped to create this deep Islamic state. When 
they are both gone, this is the legacy the people of 
Malaysia will be left with.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The Civil Service
The Malaysian civil service, which grew out of the 
old Malay states and British Malayan administra-
tions into a multi-tiered and diverse group of minis-
tries, departments, and agencies at federal, state and 
local government levels, has lost the luster that once 
characterized it, becoming an unresponsive govern-
ment unto itself within the government.
The civil service is primarily mono-ethnic, which 
doesn’t reflect society’s diversity, having devolved 
into a one-dimensional organization whose insular 
single-track thinking presents a barrier to ministries 
finding the best solutions and/or new approaches to 
problems and issues.
Changing Malaysia’s policymaking malaise is to-
tally dependent upon the reform of the civil service. 
The reality is that the civil service is more powerful 
than the executive government. Changing govern-
ments is possible through the ballot box, but chang-
ing public policy is another thing.
Although three separate administrations have held 
the reins of Malaysia’s government over as many 
years, they have one thing in common. While their 
narratives have been vastly different, all three pur-
Murray Hunter
sued in practice the same public policy framework. It 
hasn’t really mattered who governed Malaysia, policy 
has been consistent across all successive federal and 
state administrations, and local government. 
At the political level, it’s all about slogans and per-
sonalities, but at the administrative level govern-
ments differ only on emphasis.  There are three dis-
tinct aspects to Malaysian public policy: the ground-
ed philosophy, the mode of policy formulation, and 
hierarchy of implementation.
Malaysia as a post-colonial and post-independent 
economy was strongly influenced by British econom-
ic advisers who were close to the Anglophile Malay 
political elite at the time. The prevailing economic 
dogma within orientalist academia favored public 
sector-led development economic theory. The race 
riots of May 1969 highlighted the need to close the 
racial wealth gap between Chinese and Bumiputera 
groups, at the time cited as an underlying source of 
the violence.  The New Economic Policy (NEP) was 
formulated as a policy to create new wealth within 
Bumiputera groups to facilitate an economic catch 
up with the Chinese.
Although the NEP was intended as a temporary 
policy to be dissolved once bumis caught up, succes-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
sive Barisan Nasional administrations transformed 
it into a political philosophy.  Ketuanan Melayu, or 
Malay supremacy doctrine grew out of a reinterpre-
tation of the Constitution mentioning the special po-
sition of the Malays. The NEP was its manifestation, 
and an appealing policy philosophy to the rural Ma-
lay electorate. Ketuanan Melayu is evident over all 
public policy, membership of the armed forces and 
civil service, places in education, preference to Bu-
miputeras in business, and even the establishment of 
high-interest-yielding special investment accounts 
such as ASN and ASB, exclusive for Bumiputeras.
Former prime minister Mahathir Mohamed and 
his then deputy, Anwar Ibrahim, pushed for the Is-
lamization of the civil service during the 1990s, 
which developed a one-dimensional ethnic and qua-
si-religious culture within a multicultural country. 
Its informal mission became the Malay agenda.  
Since the 1963 formation of Malaysia, the civil ser-
vice is where public policy is formulated. The Prime 
Minister’s Department is by far the largest ministry, 
housing the Economic Planning Unit (EPU). The 
EPU has produced successive five-year national and 
sector plans covering all aspects of government and 
the economy. They became the basis of policy, budg-
Murray Hunter
eting, the allocation of resources and implementa-
tion. Each state has its own EPU, which usually works 
in close tandem with the federal EPU, primarily be-
cause, the federal one controls development fund al-
location.
Bureaucrats produce these plans.   As a conse-
quence, these bureaucrats have wielded great influ-
ence, with successive administrations tending to fol-
low civil service advice on most policy issues. Over 
the past couple of decades, outside parties, including 
local academics, and later consultants were brought 
in to assist in specialist areas.
Economic planning, report writing, and imple-
mentation began to be outsourced during the Ab-
dullah Badawi administration (2003-2009). This 
became a very lucrative consulting area, with Najib 
Razak, once he became minister, immediately estab-
lishing the Performance Management and Delivery 
Unit (PEMANDU) under former politician Idris 
Jala, who set up the Government Transformation 
and Economic Transformation Programs. Most pol-
icy formation was focused here, with lucrative con-
sultancies dished out to private subcontractors.
The effect of consultants taking over Five-year 
plan preparation changed the format of these reports 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
from very detailed to glossy table book presenta-
tions. Government policy and plans have lost their 
substance, degenerating into catchphrase headings 
with complex and colorful diagrams.
However, politicians through the selection and 
employment of outside consultants have more influ-
ence over the direction of public policy. There is now 
a large industry of local consultants pitching ideas at 
ministers for this lucrative work.  
The power dynamics between politicians and civil 
servants is not unsimilar to other countries. The min-
ister is a go-between the prime minister and cabinet 
and permanent director-general of the ministry. In 
Malaysia, the prime minister as government leader is 
usually the most powerful, with individual ministers 
carrying out his agenda.
A minister’s influence over his or her ministry most 
often depends upon how ‘hands on’ they are, hinging 
on the minister’s knowledge of his or her portfolio, 
ability to communicate, persuade and motivate the 
ministry director-general to follow the political line. 
Some ministers like former international trade min-
ister Rafidah Aziz, and current minister in the prime 
ministers’ department Mustapha Mohamed are well 
known for their domination and micro-managing 
Murray Hunter
of their ministries, while others like former minis-
ter Noh Omar, tended to leave almost total decision 
making to the bureaucracy.   
Parts of the civil service don’t always cooperate with 
their respective ministers, as the current minister for 
religious affairs in the Prime Minister’s Department 
is finding with JAKIM, the religious certification de-
partment. The Selangor Islamic Department (JAIS) 
in 2014 conducted raids with the police on the Ma-
laysian Bible Society that were embarrassing for the 
then-opposition Pakatan state government.
Pakatan leaders have warned publicly  that civ-
il servants loyal to the previous government  are 
out to topple the current one. Kedah Chief Minis-
ter Mukhriz Mahathir in particular has warned of a 
‘fifth column’ of civil servants supporting the oppo-
sition with their own agenda.
In other areas, civil servants act for the direct ben-
efit of their political leaders rather than national in-
terests. Asia Sentinel has learned that officers at the 
National Registration Department (JPN) in Sabah 
are issuing identity cards to illegal immigrants. These 
identity cards aren’t connected to the national data-
base. However, the Electoral Commission (EC) will 
accept them for voter registration.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The Malaysian civil service is not apolitical. The 
majority of bureaucrats have a Malay-centric world-
view. Any policy or decisions that run counter are 
stalled or blocked, overtly or sub rosa. Malaysia’s 
civil service is strongly Islamized, with an extreme-
ly strong culture that suppresses any deviation from 
accepted assumptions, beliefs, and values embedded 
with this Malay-centric worldview. When Pakatan 
Harapan took over the government, ministers found 
this an insurmountable barrier to implementing re-
forms.
Although Malaysia’s states are sovereign territories, 
state public policy is generally compatible with fed-
eral policy, except on land and religious issues. Polit-
ically, prime ministers have controlled who takes up 
the office of chief minister in states where the same 
party governs. State dependence on funding is the 
federal government’s dominant lever in influencing 
state policy. In many cases policy is implemented at 
district levels through agencies like FELDA, MARA, 
and KEMAS. With the exception of Kedah, Pahang, 
and Johor, and Sabah and Sarawak in East Malaysia, 
states have very small civil services, with federal civ-
il servants seconded to assist in state administration 
work. In states where opposition parties govern, fed-
eral governments have traditionally bypassed state 
Murray Hunter
government, and implemented policy through fed-
eral agencies. There have been no elections for local 
government since 1964. Mayors and local govern-
ment councils are state government appointees who 
generally subscribe to state policy directives. 
The unexpected win of the Pakatan Harapan re-
form government in GE14 is a good example how 
public policy remained almost the same, even 
though there was a change of government. Although 
the government created a long-term platform in 
its  buku jingga  or orange book, the administration 
almost totally relied upon the civil service to develop 
policy. This was certainly true in health, agriculture, 
primary industries, housing, rural development, and 
defense.
The only exception was education, when then-min-
ister Maszlee Malik, went rogue, micro-managed and 
implemented his own set of policies which further 
Islamized the higher education sector, rather than 
reforming it.
One of the Pakatan Harapan administration’s 
greatest mistakes was the failure to overhaul the 
public policymaking process. That process is locked 
into the inertia of developing policy through the rit-
ualization of strategic planning tools done at great 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
cost.  Consultants who are in favor with politicians 
and top bureaucrats guide these processes to prede-
termined outcomes. Little change occurs to policy 
outlooks, just a set of key performance indexes or 
targets that look good.
Participants have little opportunity to introduce 
new “out of the box” ideas. The community is rarely 
approached for input. Policy generation is still very 
much blinkered and inward-looking, run by the elite 
civil servants of Putra Jaya.  
For example, when Mustafa Mohamed became 
minister for Agriculture and Agri-based Industries 
in 2008, he asked the ministry for new thinking to 
be pursued in the floundering agriculture sector. The 
ministry was unable to present the then-minister any 
fresh ideas, due to the insular paradigm it had been 
working within for so long.
Each successive administration taking on the reins 
of government has become dependent upon this 
process for policy development. Different admin-
istrations may espouse different political ideas, but 
policy is still grounded within this same domain.
The policymaking framework has other longstand-
ing structural and dynamic weaknesses. The tradi-
Murray Hunter
tional dependence on public sector leadership in 
opening up new economic and business sectors is 
another such area. Regional economic and business 
development was made the responsibility of regional 
corridor authorities who have promoted public-sec-
tor and GLC business participation over the private 
sector and micro-businesses especially.
The Information technology industry was pro-
moted through the Malaysian Communications 
and Multimedia Commission, and biotechnology 
through various public sector agencies, leading to 
massive waste. These initiatives have all basically 
been terrible failures, leaving behind an ineffective 
bureaucracy, instead of vibrant sunrise industry op-
portunities. Public sector interference has actually 
created unnecessary barriers to entry for innovative 
start-ups, rather than providing assistance.
Government-linked companies, sovereign corpo-
rations, and state economic development authori-
ties have actually restricted, rather than opened the 
economy. In many cases these agencies create com-
panies which dominate a sector and prevent the pri-
vate sector from any meaningful market entries. Pri-
vate start-ups in many sectors rely on political con-
nections rather than new ideas, capital, skills, and 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
competencies capable of exploiting entrepreneurial 
opportunity. Creativity and innovation are stifled in 
sectors like aviation, agriculture, transport, direct 
marketing, shipping, and logistical distribution.
The policy paradigm is a hangover from the 1960s, 
designed at a time when the government had to step 
in as a pioneer in many economic sectors. The suc-
cesses of agencies like FELDA, FELCRA, UDA, and 
MARA served as antiquated models for present-day 
public policymakers to develop the multi-media, bi-
otechnology, and halal sectors with lackluster results.
Many government sector market intervention cor-
porations like the Federal Land Development Agen-
cy, which once was vital in rural development and 
uplift of rural families, now require massive taxpayer 
funded bailouts. At the state level numerous  agen-
cies and special purpose companies also suffer from 
massive losses. The extent and scope of these losses 
nation-wide is hidden by poor government transpar-
ency in these activities.
Almost 45 percent of Malaysia’s budget goes to 
paying wages and pensions to past and present civil 
servants. The civil serve directly employs 11.8 per-
cent of the country’s total workforce, continuing to 
grow due to the government’s belief in heavy market 
Murray Hunter
intervention. The civil service also serves as a vote 
bank for Malay political parties, particularly UMNO.
Malaysian politics has always been more about 
personality, than policy. Malay based parties such as 
UMNO and Bersatu rely on a Malay identity for sur-
vival. PAS relies upon its Islamic identity. They are 
satisfied and complacent with the civil service as the 
prime generator of policy. With the electoral system 
heavily malapportioned towards rural Malay elector-
ates, Ketuanan Melayu as a policy anchor is here to 
stay. The only way for this to be removed is electoral 
reform, which is not going to happen.
Just how influential and powerful the civil service 
really is in formulating and implementing policy in 
government is best seen with the current Covid-19 
pandemic, where Health Director General Noor 
Hisham Abdullah is calling all the shots without po-
litical interference.
The success of the civil service’s handling of the 
pandemic last year has bolstered the image of Mu-
hyiddin Yassin, who was promoted on billboards 
all over Sabah during the recent state election cam-
paign. The financial support provided to Sabahans 
during the pandemic made him personally popular. 
This has also enhanced the position of his Bersatu 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
party, winning 11 seats as a Malay based party that 
can potentially challenge the dominance of UMNO.
Transparency and accountability of the civil ser-
vice is also non-existent. The bulk of the annual Au-
ditor-General’s report is not released to the public. 
Information about state civil services and agencies 
is extremely difficult to obtain within the public do-
main.
No Freedom of Information Act (FOI) exists al-
though it was promised. The Official Secrets Act 
(OSA) has been routinely used to hide information 
about tenders and other government business. The 
Whistleblower Act is extremely weak and the gov-
ernment still prefers to intimidate and threaten whis-
tleblowers rather than investigate allegations of fraud 
and corruption within the civil service. There is still a 
prevailing culture, that existed even with the former 
Pakatan Harapan government, that  transparency is 
still a prerogative of government.
Contemporary politicians only really contribute 
to policymaking through their narratives and sym-
bolism. However, this can come undone very quickly 
when narratives mismatch policy reality. The 1Ma-
laysia slogan quickly wore out its luster with the elec-
torate when the public saw the same policies in ac-
Murray Hunter
tion. PH’s reformasi didn’t happen, partly leading to 
the government’s downfall. Their political staff found 
it difficult to deal with the mandarins of the civil ser-
vice. They very quickly learnt they can’t make deci-
sions within ministries.
Consequently, politicians in Malaysia prefer to 
make symbolic gestures rather than dabble in se-
rious policy reform.   Changing the name of iconic 
streets in Kuala Lumpur, as with the name change 
from Jalan Raja Laut to Jalan Palestin is much easi-
er than abolishing child marriage. Making political 
statements popular with the Malay rural heartland, 
and handing out assistance to voters wins more votes 
than policy reform.
Over time, because of the New Economic Policy 
promulgated after 1969 race riots and with covert 
encouragement from superiors, a ‘Malay agenda’ 
has developed, designed to cater to ethnic Malays 
and little else. That has created a collective narcissist, 
inward-looking, overly sensitive culture within the 
leadership of the civil service. There is an extremely 
strong power-distance relationship between superi-
ors and subordinates in which subordinates are not 
encouraged to question their superiors. Leaders of-
ten become self-important.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The culture is male-dominated, with males often 
uncomfortable and intimidated by female superiors. 
Issues are politicized. Officers are oriented to achiev-
ing “KPIs” – short-term goals --, or developing long-
term visions, that won’t be met during their career 
lifetimes, resulting in events and meetings to impress 
and please superiors rather than specific, concrete 
objectives.
For all intents and purposes, the civil service is 
the government. Whether Pakatan Harapan, UM-
NO-PAS, or something in-between is in power, the 
civil service will remain the same. There is a much 
deeper level here below the public hype. Mahathir 
and Anwar together back in the 1980s and 90s cre-
ated the culture within the civil service that exists 
today. So far there is no real evidence to indicate 
any politicians in government want to substantially 
change it.
Ketuanan Melayu
The Ketuanan Melayu narrative – Malaysia’s Ma-
lays-first policy – has enabled an embedded deep 
state to become the dominant political, social, and 
economic force in the country. It is the primary tool 
the power elite have used to justify and cover their 
actions in pursuing their covert objectives over na-
tional policy.
Murray Hunter
The deep state is a guileful legacy of colonial times. 
The British built up the persona of the sultans – most 
of them local warlords -- as a buffer to thwart any 
potential revolt. Any political movement against the 
British would be construed as a revolt against them. 
Further, the British knew that Malays would not 
challenge a ruler due to strong respect for their sov-
ereign (Daulat) and the mystical aura the monarchs 
were perceived to possess.
Twentieth-Century communist infiltration of the 
union movement, and the beginning of the commu-
nist insurgency after WWII gave rise to the forma-
tion of Special Branch within the Malayan Union 
police force. Special Branch was Malayanized after 
independence and has ever since carried out a strong 
political agenda.
In 1969 the Alliance Government, the forerunner 
to the Barisan Nasional, was returned to power with 
a greatly reduced majority. In a boiling political en-
vironment, race riots soon erupted in what is known 
as the May 13 incident. After the riots, Malaysia’s first 
prime minister Tunku Abdul Rahman disappeared 
from day-to-day running of the country and even-
tually formally handed over power to Tun Abdul 
Razak.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Contradicting the official line that the May 13 inci-
dent was started by Chinese opposition and the Ma-
laysian Communist Party,  declassified British Em-
bassy dispatches indicate that Malay political leaders 
from within UMNO organized along with police and 
the army to deliver what amounted to a coup d’état 
against the Tunku for his perceived pro-Chinese 
stance.
Not all documents relating to the May 13 riots have 
been, or are likely to be released by the Pakatan Hara-
pan Government in the near future.
Tun Abdul Razak developed a New Economic 
Policy (NEP) which  was purportedly designed  to 
enhance the economic position of Malays without 
disadvantaging other races.  Rukunegara, similar to 
Indonesia’s Pancasila, was promoted to encourage 
national unity among Malaysians, and the Barisan 
Nasional government was formed with a spectrum 
of parties representing the major races in Malaysia.
Mahathir Mohamed, a  Malay extremist politi-
cian who lost his parliamentary seat in 1969 to PMIP 
(the forerunner to PAS) wrote a provocative book 
The Malay Dilemma. Mahathir took up the old Brit-
ish narratives about the “lazy natives” and argued the 
Murray Hunter
Malays’ non-confrontational approach to other rac-
es was dispossessing them of their own land. Thus, 
affirmative action was needed to keep the economy 
from being dominated by the Chinese.
Mahathir returned to UMNO politics in 1973. PAS 
became a fierce competitor for UMNO in the Malay 
heartlands. Article 153 of the Constitution guaran-
teeing special rights for the Malays (and other indig-
enous peoples) fueled a much stronger pro-Malay 
narrative, which became known as Ketuanan Mel-
ayu.
The NEP drastically changed the nature of govern-
ment policy and structure of the economy. State inter-
vention to correct economic inequalities, regulation, 
license and permit restrictions, were introduced. 
State mercantilism on a massive scale was developed 
and the government became embedded within most 
aspects of the economy. Banks and agencies were uti-
lized to dispense easy loans to Malays.
Although the NEP helped create a Malay middle 
class, it also created a super-rich Malay elite. There 
were many other undesirable side effects. An apart-
heid system was introduced into the civil service, 
eventually bloating it and making parts of it ineffi-
cient. With easy access to loans, Malays became risk 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
adverse, leading to many business failures and bank-
ruptcies.
Some industries became monopolies or duopolies 
yielding bumper profits. State enterprises in many 
cases were corrupt and inefficient and often com-
peted directly with entrepreneurs and SMEs. Equity 
accumulation became more important than raising 
incomes, leaving many still in poverty. Licenses and 
permits fell into the hands of political cronies who 
rented them out to others for profit.
Cronyism and corruption became the norm. The 
NEP ended up dividing the country even more and 
created a deep-seated resentment towards the Ma-
lays by other races.
After nearly 50 years of the NEP and its hybrids, 
distinct covert objectives can be observed.
The NEP has created a class-based neo-feudal soci-
ety headed by a small elite group. Even though there 
was a change in government last year, the elite still 
holds the reigns of power. A kleptocracy has been 
created, primarily based on rent-seeking rather than 
innovation. This has maximized the return to mo-
nopolists but left a narrowly diverse, inefficient econ-
omy that needs urgent overhaul. It has also amassed 
Murray Hunter
great wealth to the elite, with UMNO  reported to 
have over RM 100 Billion in assets alone.
To achieve the above objectives, society has been 
engineered, the politics of division played out, and a 
culture of dependence created.
The symbols within Malaysian society today reflect 
class and feudalism. Royal titles and VVIP rooms in 
government offices depict feudalistic class distinc-
tions.
National narratives are shepherded by Malay ul-
tra-nationalist groups to continually force capitu-
lation of non-Malay groups in society. This is rein-
forced by nonsensical attacks on architecture that 
may resemble a cross on a building, the banning of 
non-alcoholic beer, the exclusive use of the word 
Allah for Muslims, and the banning of forums and 
books.
The Islamic renaissance in Malaysia has been asso-
ciated with Arabism, so many Malays today appear 
so visually different than their non-Muslim peers in 
society.
Hantus or bogeymen have been created to unite 
Malays against others in what can be professed as 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
hate politics. The narratives of  pendatang, attacks 
on Jews, the reaction against the Rome Statute and 
ICERD, all serve the purpose to create an aura that 
Malays are under attack.
A culture of dependency has been manufactured. 
This is based on the assumption that bumiputeras 
should be given continuing help because Malaysia is 
their land alone and that other races are interlopers. 
At election time politicians use this as leverage for 
votes in the Malay heartlands, where electoral mal-
apportionment makes it the primary electoral battle-
ground.
This has been soul-destroying on Malay confidence 
to the benefit of the elite. Malays have been taught 
to fear, be dependent, and metaphorically to wait for 
their savior. Politicians want to project themselves as 
saviors rather than enablers of society. This will be 
the psychic battleground for the hearts and minds of 
voters next election.
The Malay persona of a peaceful village life, coop-
eration, self-sufficiency, living a within a rich Nusan-
tara culture, where there is amity towards others, once 
an integral part of self-identity, has been trampled on 
in favor of unemployment, lack of opportunity, drug 
abuse and subservience. The middle-class is locked 
Murray Hunter
into debt and a conformity-ridden lifestyle. A large 
number of Malays still live on bare means, totally ig-
nored by the governing elite in Malaysia’s neo-feudal 
society once their votes have been extracted.
The mythical concept of Malay unity has been re-
framed to mean that any diverging opinions against 
the Malay agenda are a threat to unity. Arguing 
against Malay unity is viewed as disloyalty and even 
treason to one’s race. The mythology of Malay uni-
ty is keeping Malays within a psychic prison, stifling 
self-expression, self-confidence, and self-respect. So-
ciety has become super-sensitive to criticism where 
it’s now taboo to discuss many issues, even with a 
new government in power.
Ketuanan Melayu is still the philosophical basis of 
all policy making within government today. Mem-
bers of the prominent elite like Tun Daim Zainuddin 
stand up from time to time to defend the need for 
maintaining the NEP, be it in some modified form. 
The narrative is a fiction designed to keep its perpe-
trators in power. Those who benefit the most are the 
ones who shout out about the need for the NEP.
The history of Malaysia has been completely re-
written to suit the elite and preserve the feudal status 
quo. The British negotiated the Merdeka Constitution 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
from Malaya with the royals and elite of Malay soci-
ety, while the voices of the rakyat, the people, were 
glossed over.  Massive national protests  and a civil 
disobedience movement fought against the Merde-
ka Constitution. Opposition movements proposed a 
more egalitarian constitution, which was totally ig-
nored by the elite and the British. On 18th June 1948, 
the British rounded up protest leaders and held them 
without trial.
Declassification of the May 13 documents would 
destroy the mythology the government created as 
the foundation of Ketuanan Melayu. There is a dis-
tinct possibility, if the British Embassy dispatches at 
the time are correct, that many of the elite, some still 
alive today, would be incriminated in instigating the 
incident. This is perhaps the real reason the Rome 
Statute ratification was sabotaged.
Today, Malaysia is chained to this feudal-like so-
ciety. The last election didn’t change that. Ignorance 
is the key to perpetuating the myths that are keeping 
Ketuanan Melayu in place, allowing the continuing 
plundering of the nation that has been going on since 
British times.
Malaysia is still colonized, just by a different group. 
Murray Hunter
The different races making up Malaysia are kept di-
vided to prevent true nationhood. This is the coun-
try’s tragedy.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Malaysia: Mapping out the deep state  
How the deep state operates and nexus  
between the actors 
The major objective of the ‘so called deep state’ is to 
seek, secure, and exploit rent-seeking opportunities, 
engineered by the players within the ‘political-insti-
tutional environment’. These ‘engineered opportuni-
ties’ are created through legal monopolies, favouring 
certain parties, while keeping procurement opaque. 
Parties within the system protects the players from 
facing investigation and prosecution, over any charg-
es of abuse of power.  
Murray Hunter
The ’so called deep state’ refers to an ad hoc and liq-
uid set of institutions, agencies, crony corporations, 
and individuals, who are able to act ultra vires to the 
legal system with almost absolute impunity. ‘Engi-
neered opportunities’ are legal or illegal activities that 
are able make profits. The ‘political-institutional envi-
ronment’ relates to the cast of entities that enable the 
facilitation of profit-centred activities (see figure 1.). 
 
Major institutions and players
The deep state can be metaphorically described as 
a moving kaleidoscope of institutions, agencies, cor-
porations, organized crime, cronies, and facilitators 
that undertake activities aimed towards making prof-
its within the ‘political-institutional environment’. 
There is no central leader, no ‘big picture’ objec-
tive, other than the pursuit of profits, at many levels. 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The players are described below:
Prime ministers, key ministers, and the execu-
tive
The key element of the ‘so called’ deep state is the 
prime minister. The power of others greatly depends 
upon how the prime minister exerts his own power. 
Mahathir was a very powerful prime minister. He 
pushed the Royal households into a defence position.
He had loyalty from the Special Branch. He invented 
crony capitalism, alongside his deputy prime min-
ister Anwar Ibrahim. He set up a conglomerate of 
UMNO companies, run by proxies to fund the party. 
Abdullah Ahmad Badawi left much of his power in 
the hands of a group called “the fourth floor boys”, led 
by his son in law Khairy Jamaluddin. Najib Razak set 
up a sovereign fund 1Malaysia Development Berhad, 
which resulted in a massive financial scandal, which 
put Najib behind bars. Najib enhanced the Malaysian 
External Intelligence Organization (MEIO) to rival 
Special Branch, which he didn’t trust. 
Both Najib and Badawi’s administration before 
him, outsourced much government work to consult-
ants to redistribute income towards crony business-
es. The balance of power greatly differed between 
Murray Hunter
each administration. A vibrant company consulting 
for the federal or state government, could go bank-
rupt, after a change of administration, when incom-
ing prime ministers and chief ministers channelled 
government business to other firms. 
The various ministries are best seen as small em-
pires, where ministers and their political staff have 
influence over the spending of budget allocations, 
and contracts. The home minister is a very vital, as 
both the police and attorney generalare placed under 
the home ministry. 
Political Benefactors 
The recently convicted John Soh Chee Wen in 
Singapore over the Penny stock crash, had been as-
sisting politicians since the early 1990s. Soh helped 
finance and facilitate with the Malaysian Chinese As-
sociation (MCA) until the late 1990s. Soh switched 
his support to Anwar Ibrahim, after becoming good 
friends in the late 1990s, supporting Anwar during 
the early ‘Reformasi’ period. It is believed he sup-
ported the growth of PartiKeadilan Rakyat during 
the developing years and even purchased the PKR 
headquarters building in Petaling Jaya for the party. 
Perhaps Malaysia’s most infamous benefactors was 
Koo Tam Yam, one of the four major gangland lead-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
ers, nicknamed the ‘Heavenly kings’. Koo is believed 
to have abandoned his underworld activities and 
invested in a firm, Caerly HoldingsBhd. Koo is be-
lieved to have funded Mahathir Mohamed, Abdullah 
Ahmad Badawi, and now Anwar Ibrahim. Koo held 
a large free diner for Anwar in 2018, when he was 
running for the seat of Port Dickson.
The criminal underground 
The criminal underworld is a vital part of the deep 
state. There is a very strong connection between pol-
iticians, the police, and even some parts of Royal 
households. These are very complex relationships, 
with intertwining company directorships in many 
companies, that legitimize the criminal element and 
launder money. 
The activities some of these criminal elements car-
ry out include is the distribution of narcotics, human 
trafficking, prostitution, employment scams, foreign 
workers, money laundering, and even counterfeit-
ing. Very few of these operations are ever uncovered 
due to police complicity, and selective prosecution. 
A whistle-blower recently described how some of the 
top officers are taking bribes to prevent investigation. 
Murray Hunter
Facilitators
There are many facilitators who have close relation-
ships with business, Royal households, civil servants, 
and politicians. These people facilitate what needs to 
be done in order to connect and coordinate with oth-
er players. These include both short-term and long-
terms relationships between parties. 
The most well known example was the appoint-
ment of the former Inspector General of Police (IGP) 
Mohammed Hanif Omar to the board as an execu-
tive deputy chairman for Genting Malaysia Berhad. 
Hanif was also a director of Binariang, Arab Malay-
sia Holdings, and a number of Renong companies. 
Hanif would act as a go-between of parties, and built 
a private police force for Genting. 
Royal Families
The monarchy is based upon nine old Malay Sul-
tanates that came together with Melaka, and Penang 
to form Malaya. Although, technically constitution-
al monarchies, the royal households are the apex of 
an ancient Malay class-based feudal system. To some 
degree Malaysia is still a patriarchy, rather than a 
full-functioning democracy. 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The sultans (Agong) have much discretion to ap-
point a chief minister (prime minister), within their 
respective states. Most of the sultans’ selections are 
not tested on the floor of the parliament and assem-
blies to confirm they carry a majority of support on 
the floor of the house. 
The monarchy also has a say in important appoint-
ments. The YDPA, or king delayed the appointment 
of Tommy Thomas as attorney general and Tengku 
Maimun Tuan Mat as the chief justice for more than 
two months. 
The monarchy has tremendous informal power. 
Sultans hold regular meetings with their executive 
councils, which provide them an opportunity each 
week to give their views on the running of the state. 
Sultans also make regular trips to state departments, 
agencies, universities, schools, military bases, and 
mosques. The heads of these state institutions are 
invited to the palace on both official and social oc-
casions. The majority of members within the civil 
service are loyal to the sultans. In the eyes of some, 
loyalty to Tuanku, overrides loyalty to the elected 
government. 
All the royal households have developed their own 
business empires. Most prime ministers and chief 
Murray Hunter
ministers are subservient to monarchy over issues 
regarding land and business concessions. Protect-
ed forests have been de-gazetted and handed over 
as concessions to companies linked to royal house-
holds. Anwar Ibrahim is expected to behave in a sim-
ilar manner. During the last Pakatan Harapan gov-
ernment, more draconian legislation was introduced 
to stiffen penalties for criticism of the monarchy. 
Civil Service
The civil service is a major component of the deep 
state. The civil service plays a role in structure and 
process facilitation. Most federal budget spending 
is channelled through ministries and their satellite 
agencies.  Its within ministry procedures that money 
flows for allocated purposes. 
Therefore, political leaders and their staff must rely 
upon the civil servants within the ministries to direct 
funds into selected contracts. Through selective spe-
cial purpose ventures, operated either by cronies or 
proxies are the beneficiaries of these funds. Getting 
things done, requires collaboration between people 
within the political and administrative arms of gov-
ernment. 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Within the deep state paradigm, ministries should 
be viewed at semi-independent empires, which can 
set up agencies or business subsidiaries. Its within 
these agencies and business entities that financial 
activities escape the direct view of the government 
auditors. 
From the financial scandals listed below, it can be 
seen which ministries are important. 
1Malaysia Development Berhad – Finance Minis-
try
SG Networks – Communications Ministry
Littoral Combat Ships – Defence Ministry
Mysajathera – Health Ministry
ECRL – Finance Ministry
Sabah Gas Pipeline – Finance Ministry
Sabah Solar Panel – Finance Ministry
Scorpene Submarines – Defence Ministry
Port Klang Free Port – Transport Ministry
The Home Ministry is extremely powerful. The li-
aison with the Royal Malaysian Police (PDRM), and 
Special Branch has great impact upon the security of 
the actors within the deep state. This influence de-
pends upon the minister in charge, and the quality of 
personal relationship with the Inspector General of 
Police (IGP), and head of the Special Branch. There 
Murray Hunter
is also a belief that extra-judicial activities are under-
taken from rogue officers within the PDRM to pro-
tect the interests of actors within the deep state. Some 
of these rogue agents work in tandem with organized 
crime to undertake threats, blackmail, intimidation, 
incrimination, humiliation, and even elimination. 
The Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission 
(MACC), operates under the attorney general, who 
decides who should be prosecuted by the body. The 
MACC is not an independent body. Over the last 
few decades, the MACC has been used to selectively 
prosecute political enemies of those in power. 
How public monies are leaked to private compa-
nies is shown in the figure below.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Special Branch
The Special Branch (SB) is the most secretive di-
vision within the Royal Malaysian Police (PDRM). 
The SB is the nation’s premier covert and intelligence 
unit. Although the former Inspector General of Po-
lice (IGP) Abdul Hamid Bador denied accusations 
the SB has no operational capabilities, it is generally 
believed to have been behind the disappearance of 
two social activists, Amri Che Mat, and Pastor Ray-
mond Koh. 
Without any public charter, the SB is basically free 
to operate the way it wants. Being a division within 
the PDRM, hides the SB even more. The SB has infil-
trated most organizations within Malaysia, including 
federal and state civil services, government agencies, 
media organizations, and even the Prime Minister’s 
Office. 
The unit has excellent relations with most of the 
Royal households. 
The political division within the SB conducts prop-
aganda and misinformation campaigns to influence 
public opinion. The SB is believed to have good coop-
erative links with social media platforms. The SB also 
conducts ‘turning operations’ to change the views of 
Murray Hunter
targeted people. Wikileaks revealed correspondence 
between Australian and Singaporean intelligence or-
ganization, where the Singapore agency told the Aus-
tralians that sodomy charges against Anwar Ibrahim 
was the result of a ‘honey trap’ set up by the SB.
Today, the SB has a budget in excess of RM 500 mil-
lion, which doesn’t include slush funds to carry out 
sensitive operations. The SB has more than 10,000 
staff, and 10-15,000 informants across the country 
and overseas. 
Crony Capitalists
There are a number of closely affiliated crony capi-
talists who carry special favour with past prime min-
isters. They are given special concessions, GLCs on 
soft terms, granted monopolies, or given special pro-
jects. Most of these businesses are rent-seeking ac-
tivities, which provide bumper profits. Perhaps the 
best way to describe these companies are Politically 
Linked Corporations (PLCs), as opposed to GLCs. 
The best known crony capitalist is Syed Mokhtar 
Albukari. The Albukhari Group of companies in-
cludes DRB-HICOM, Tradewinds Plantations, 
and the Bernas rice monopoly. Albukhari was also 
awarded a lucrative 5G concession by the Ministry of 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Communications and Multimedia through ALTEL. 
Other politically linked business people include 
Vincent Tan Chee Yioun, who leads the Berjaya Cor-
poration, and Ananda Krishnan, who controls Astro, 
MEASAT, and MAXIS.
Former prime minister Mahathir Mohamed, and 
his then deputy prime minister attempted to cre-
ate and elite group of Malay billionaires back in the 
1990s. There was a host of politically linked business 
people, which included Halim Saad, who then con-
trolled the UEM-Renang group until 2001, Taijuddin 
Ramli, who took over and private the national air-
line Malaysia Airlines, and was bailed out after a few 
years, and Eric Chia, who drove Perwaja steel to the 
ground. 
Over the years, there have been a number of oth-
er business people who were given opportunities. 
One was Abu Sahid Mohamed and his Maju Hold-
ings group. Tony Fernandez was given a debt ridden 
failed airline, Air Asia by former prime minister Ma-
hathir for RM 1. 
The government was also used to bail out crony 
business people. Petronas, a GLC, bailed out Ma-
hathir’s eldest son Mizan’s company, KonsortiumP-
erkapalan in 1998.  
Murray Hunter
Over the years, many business people had close 
connections to Malaysia’s top politicians, who assist-
ed them in business. After GLCs, PLCs are perhaps 
the second highest capitalised group of companies 
within Malaysia. 
There is no level playing field in Malaysian busi-
ness. Even the new prime minister Anwar Ibrahim 
won’t break them up.
Economic Planning Unit (EPU)
The Economic Planning Unity (EPU) five year 
plan preparation is abused when political leaders 
force through priority projects, where PLCs will gain 
the bulk of grants, incentives, and contracts. Five 
year plans are a major method where funds can be 
redistributed towards PLCs. The plan to develop the 
aerospace industry in the 12th Malaysian Plan is one 
such example. Many projects channelled through 
five year plans end up as white elephants. The real 
motivation behind some projects is to profit on the 
construction and supply of equipment, rather than 
produce a worthwhile community asset. 
The most prized asset of the above system is that 
power is abused by making laws, manipulating ten-
ders and procurements, and favouring specific firms, 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
can be undertaken without any accountability. This 
is the most important source of power the Malay-
sian political-bureaucracy has. Many of the players 
avoid any criminal prosecution due to the selective 
investigation and prosecution the attorney general 
and MACC make. Even if there is a prosecution, the 
prosecutors may make such a weak case, the defend-
ant gets acquitted in court. 
Conclusion
The deep state is a major reason why the Malay-
sian economy is primarily based upon rent-seeking 
activities, rather than innovative based activities. The 
deep state is holding up any type of deregulation, and 
not breaking up artificial monopolies. 
Its very quickly becoming apparent, the new gov-
ernment will also not intervene in this area.
One of the most powerful bonds of the deep state is 
the ‘school tie’, and the comradery that comes from it. 
This comes from a privileged education for the chil-
dren of the elite Malay class. The belief within some 
political circles that ‘adakuasa, bolehjadi kaya’ (have 
authority, you can become rich), and ‘we are the law’, 
perpetuates this deep state culture in Malaysia. 
Murray Hunter
Competition and frictions  
within the Malaysian Deep State
There is some belief that the so-called deep state is 
responsible for many predetermined acts in Malay-
sia. Some believe that the abduction and disappear-
ance of Amri Che Mat and Pastor Raymond Koh 
were acts undertaken by elements within the deep 
state. Likewise, the acquittal of Ahmad Zahid Hami-
di of corruption charges, Abdul Azeez being granted 
a discharge not amounting to an acquittal, and Bung 
Moktar and his wife given a stay from entering a de-
fence on charges of criminal breach of trust (CBT), 
all on the same day raised conjecture deep state forc-
es were at play. 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
There is a belief that the deep state is a united ho-
mogenous entity which influences the running of 
government, and policy decisions,with some unity 
of purpose. 
Nothing could be further from the truth. 
Traditionally the deep state is defined as a secret or 
hidden group and networks of groups who are able 
to yield power and influence upon a country’s politi-
cal leadership in pursuit of a clandestine agenda. The 
deep state is sometimes referred to as a shadow gov-
ernment, inferring some form of purposeful agenda 
of interest to the group. 
In Malaysia, the components of the deep state are 
generally believed to consist of the monarchy, elite 
Malay establishment, the Special Branch, the civil 
service, and the Islamists. 
It is assumed their agenda is a coherent and con-
sistent one, pursuing clear ideological objectives, 
KetuananMelayu or Malay supremacy being the un-
derlining mission. 
However, this is only an espoused mission, where 
elements within the deep state often pursue conflict-
ing and competing objectives, sometimes blocking 
or sabotaging other components of the deep state. 
Murray Hunter
Thus, the deep state is often in conflict, in a state 
of flux, self-destructive, and transformative into 
mostly weak and short-term alliances.Within these 
groupings, groups and sub-groups pursue their own 
agendas and ideologies independently. From this 
perspective, the concept of Malay unity within the 
clandestine institutions at the pinnacle of Malay so-
ciety is not much more than mythology. 
This can be clearly seen in the current struggles 
going on within the Malay political elite. Malaysia 
has seen three prime ministers over the last 4 years, 
and a former prime minister charged, convicted, 
and jailed. Through the political paradigm, all these 
struggles and sanctions against Najib Razak all fall 
into the Malay Machiavellian struggle for power and 
savage retribution against foes. 
Such struggles have been witnessed for generations 
within Malay politics. The May 13 riots can be seen 
as the catalyst that allowed the engineering of a coup 
against the then sitting prime minister Tunku Abdul 
Rahman by young ultraconservative UMNO mem-
bers, led by Mahathir Mohamed. 
The February 2020 Sheraton Putsch when Ma-
hathir resigned his commission as prime minister, 
leading to the fall of the Pakatan Harapan govern-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
ment, allowing for the formation of a Malay-centric 
government, is a brutal exhibition of competition 
within the Malay elite for the trappings of power.
In 2010, a palace feud where the ailing sultan of 
Kelantan was deposed by his eldest son, utilizing 
house arrest and road police block tactics in the 
struggle, gave some public exposure of the divisions 
and feuds within the Royal families. Division by the 
Royal families is a major factor preventing Najib re-
ceiving any possible pardon and release from prison.
Civil servants within agencies and ministries often 
block or sabotage their ministers, neutralizing their 
ability to implement policy. Civil servants see their 
own internal agendas as being more important than 
their minister’s policy plans. Chief ministers often 
find heavy pushback from their own state civil serv-
ants when they attempt to push through their pol-
icies. One civil servant told the author they would 
simply ignore their chief minister’s directions unless 
he repeatedly made the same request. 
The civil service has enormous power over both 
policy and implementation, that is rarely seen by the 
public. The extent of this power was only seen during 
the Covid-19 pandemic, where the Director Gener-
al of the Ministry of Health Noor Hisham Abdullah 
Murray Hunter
took direct control over pandemic response decision 
making. 
The Islamic Development Department (JAKIM) is 
often criticized for overreach on Islamic issues. With-
in JAKIM itself, there are power struggles going on. 
A group of corrupt civil servants are vying for con-
trol of the organization, while groups aligned with 
the Salafi and Muslim Brotherhood movements are 
engaged in a struggle for influence within JAKIM. 
Officially, JAKIM is under the control of the Coun-
cil of Rulers. However, in reality it is supposedly un-
der daily control of the Minister for Religious Issues 
in the Prime Minister’s Department Idris Ahmad. 
A group referred to as the Alumni has many of its 
members scattered around JAKIM’s hierarchy, influ-
encing its day-to-day operations and internal policy 
direction. 
JAKIM as a department within the Malaysian bu-
reaucracy is in the frontline in the fight for control by 
rival groups. 
The so-called deep state a contentious grouping of 
people and institutions in competition. One part of 
this “secret” bureaucracy is not aware of what other 
parts are doing. When talking about the deep state, 
one must understand its complexity and decentral-
ization. Consequently, there is no uniform or clan-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
destine central secret agenda prevailing. One should 
rather look at the deep state as a field of competition 
for power and influence over sections of Malaysian 
government and society. 
This is not to say that the deep state doesn’t hold 
a prominent position of influence in society, influ-
encing much of what happens. This is an area that 
requires much more study to understand who really 
holds the power within Malaysia. 
Murray Hunter
How the Malay elite hijacked Malaysia 
Malaysia’s privileged divide
With the United Malays National Organization, 
or UMNO back in political power with a firm and 
dominating position to the other Malay-centric po-
litical parties, kleptocratic practices are on the rise 
once again. The myth that UMNO is the defender of 
the marginalized Malays is clearly tarnished for all to 
see. The New Economic Policy (NEP), its derivatives, 
and the ideology of Ketuanan Melayu, or Malay su-
premacy have been exposed for what they really are.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The Malay polity and their cohorts once again con-
trol government administration and are clearly look-
ing after their own. The rest of Malaysia’s citizens 
have been largely left to fend for themselves. Suffered 
greatly during the Covid crisis, the establishment 
have been getting richer. Corruption, enrichment, 
favouritism, and blatant disregard to the process of 
law is the signature of this government.
The Ismail Sabri government appears to represent 
patriarchal elite Malay society. At the centre are long 
established political families who have been involved 
in the forefront of political and government, since in-
dependence. They have appeased the royal families, 
which provide symbolic authority to give legitimacy.
This elite is supported by a nexus of political war-
lords spreading down to the village level across the 
Malay peninsula. These warlords operate under pa-
tronage and in-turn provide a powerbase to the lead-
ers of political families. Then comes a large group 
of the country’s civil servants whose loyalty is to the 
Malay agenda rather than the government of the 
day. A professional class running the nation’s banks, 
GLC’s, and government agencies have strong vested 
interests with those of the ruling elites. Finally, the 
nation’s elites have made a pact with the Islamic cler-
ics to create religious legitimacy.
Murray Hunter
A diverse feudal-like grouping
The Malay establishment is not a unified group. Its 
an umbrella of different institutions and organiza-
tions with varying missions and objectives. Most are 
in competition with each other for power and influ-
ence. Nevertheless, they are politically interconnect-
ed, and fall in and out of alliances with each other. 
Most often, the most powerful interconnections are 
informal and based on personal relationships rather 
than ideologies.
The Malay establishment is best seen as being a 
group of smaller empires that have their own section-
al interests. Some of these institutions and organiza-
tions include, the Conference of Rulers, individual 
royal households, the prime minister, Malay-centric 
political parties, the Department of Islamic Develop-
ment or JAKIM, the ministry of education, ministry 
of home affairs, ministry of finance, the civil service, 
some of the larger GLCs, the armed forces, and the 
police (special branch). Some more covert organiza-
tions like the Alumni, a group of Salafi-leaning Ma-
lay professionals entrenched within government and 
commerce also exercise considerable influence.
This all blends in to form the Malay establishment. 
The dynamics, interrelationships, and alliances con-
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
tinually change. For example, there is currently some 
friction between a number of royal households and 
JAKIM over the scope and jurisdiction of the later at 
state level. Relationships appear to be more transac-
tional, than based upon any common visions about 
the future of Malaysia. Other organizations such as 
the judiciary, the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Com-
mission (MACC), immigration, and local govern-
ment are most often tools of the establishment. Any 
organization or individual outside these groupings is 
considered outsiders.
UMNO is back as patriarchal head of the Malay 
establishment once again as it controls the govern-
ment, GLCs, many of the state governments, and has 
good relationships with most of the royal houses.
The biggest assets: no accountability, no trans-
parency
The Malay establishment is able to make decisions, 
implement policies, undertake business, and carry 
out corrupt practices without scrutiny from the pub-
lic. Only brave journalists and news portals, most 
of who have been persecuted and prosecuted were 
able to expose a number of corruption scandals over 
the decades in Malaysia. These include Bumiputera 
Malaysia Finance scandal of 1982, Bank Negara Ma-
Murray Hunter
laysia’s RM32 billion foreign exchange losses during 
the 1980s and 90s, the French Scorpene-class sub-
marine scandal of 2002, the National Feedlot scandal 
of 2012, the 1MDB scandal going back to 2012, the 
Wang Kelian scandal of 2017, and the meat substitu-
tion scandal at the end of last year.
These are only the top of the iceberg. There are 
many other scandals the public doesn’t even know 
about hidden away within ministries, agencies and 
state government agencies, and GLCs. Most don’t 
come to light because of the harsh treatment of whis-
tle-blowers, and the use of the Official Secrets Act 
(OSA) to cover up exclusive contracts given to fa-
voured companies.
There is a growing clampdown on press freedom 
in Malaysia. Online news portals operate in the fear 
that their licenses won’t be renewed or shutdown 
the then provocative The Malaysian Insider in 2016. 
Most domestic news portals practice self-censorship 
due to harsh defamation laws that gravely hinder in-
vestigative journalism. Nothing has been officially 
done to investigate allegations against former Bank 
Negara Malaysia governor Zeti Akhtar Aziz and 
family members involvement in the 1MDB scandal.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
There is no Freedom of Information legislation, 
and only scant details of Auditor General reports 
make public news. The standard operating proce-
dure of government appears to be just allowing em-
barrassing news about corruption to publicly blow 
over and be forgotten by the public.
The anti-corruption framework is weak, grossly 
under-resourced and potential MACC prosecutions 
need approval from the Attorney General, who is a 
political appointment.
Many within the civil service caught undertaking 
illegal acts are not reported to anti-corruption inves-
tigators. Many scandals are just swept under the car-
pet to protect prominent people and the reputation 
of the institutions involved. This creates the belief 
among many in powerful positions they will not face 
any sanctions or justice, if caught out undertaking 
corrupt or illegal activities.
The cancer of crony capitalism
The depth and extent of crony capitalism practices 
have been well documented. It extends from Malay-
sia’s largest corporations down to class F contractors 
or petty traders, where may citizens are trying to 
scratch out a living.
Murray Hunter
Over the last 50 years, the establishment has looked 
after its own. Royal households have been given lu-
crative timber and other business concessions. Poli-
ticians have built up business empires and networks 
of associates benefitting from inside information and 
favoritism. A small group of connected businesspeo-
ple have been given choice monopolies, concessions, 
restricted business operating licenses, and allowed to 
takeover public assets and convert them into private 
assets by reigning prime ministers.
Crony capitalism is starving any sense of equality 
of business opportunities in the economy. Compa-
nies succeed through connections, not vision, supe-
rior products and competitiveness. So much of the 
economy is restricted to a few, market opportunity 
is certainly not equal for all. Even existing successful 
businesses are being forced to devest to Bumiputera 
equity holders, as was seen with the freight forward-
ing regulations, requiring companies with operating 
licenses to have 51 percent Bumiputera equity.
This has resulted in the Malay establishment be-
coming a class of rent-seekers, taking little, if any risk 
in their business undertakings. Some of those who 
fail have been bailed out. Not all Malays are equal. 
Many Malays themselves distinguish Bumiputeras 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
from UMNO-putras, who are given unfair privileg-
es. The 12th Malaysia Plan has been framed in such 
a way that it will benefit the connected, rather than 
equally among Bumiputeras, and other Malaysians. 
Malay businesses without connections are most like-
ly to get little, if any assistance.
The ability of the Malay establishment to restrict 
economic opportunity has assisted in creating a pa-
triarchal society based upon reward and punishment. 
Malaysia has slipped from the 3rd to the 6th largest 
economy within ASEAN since 2015.
Tearing down secularism
Although Malaysia has a primarily secular consti-
tution, Article 3 states that Islam is the religion of 
the federation, but other religious may be practiced 
in peace and harmony. The supreme governing body 
of Malaysia is the parliament, which is made up of 
the Yang Di-Petuan Agong or king, the Dewan Rak-
yat or lower house, and the Senate or upper house. 
With the government coming from the lower house 
by popular vote, government is inferred to be of a 
secular nature.
The Rukun Negara or national principles is the 
declaration of a formal national philosophy, pro-
Murray Hunter
claimed on Merdeka Day in 1970. The five Rukun 
Negara principles are belief in God, loyalty to king 
and country, supremacy of the constitution, sover-
eignty of the law, and courtesy and morality.
However, Malaysia has been heading down an Is-
lamization path since the 1970s. Nowhere has this 
been more apparent than in the education system. 
Education has been one of the major contributing 
factors in creating an Islamic identity within Malays. 
Over three generation this has led to a greater divi-
sion of the community, which was up until the 1970s, 
an inclusive multi-cultural one. The former prime 
minister Mahathir Mohamed and his then deputy 
Anwar Ibrahim Islamized the civil service during 
the 1990s. Syariah laws have been strengthened and 
the Malaysia Islamic Development Department or 
JAKIM was formed in 1997 under the Prime Min-
isters Office to centralise bureaucratic control over 
Islamic affairs. The freedom of non-Muslims to ex-
press their respective faiths has been whittled away 
over the last two decades.
During the 1990s when UMNOs electoral nemesis 
was the Parti Islam Se-Malaysia or PAS, Mahathir de-
clared that Malaysia was an Islamic state. Within the 
public sector, military, higher education, and across 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Malay led state governments, most employment po-
sitions exclude non-Malays. Even other Bumiputer-
as were at a disadvantage in career upward mobili-
ty, unless they were Muslims themselves. The com-
munity gulf between Muslims and non-Muslims is 
wider than ever. Malays themselves are under strong 
pressure to conform and be compliant to the exclu-
sionist culture that has been developing over the last 
two decades.
The dismantling of secularism has enhanced the 
power of the Malay elite. The authority of the estab-
lishment is almost unquestioned today openly. Its 
not impossible to question the role of Islam in gov-
ernment and society. There is now little separation 
between Islam and government, with a state defined 
Islam forced upon the citizenry. Islam in Malaysia is 
not a spiritual undertaking, but a matter of compul-
sory adherence.
The great divide
The tangibles from the Malay establishment hijack-
ing Malaysian politics, economics, and society have 
been to create a land of the privileged. The product of 
this is the rich are getting richer and the poor are get-
ting relatively poorer. Islam and racial politics have 
just hidden the real divide, that being of class.
Murray Hunter
The Malay-centric political parties have been fight-
ing for the spoils of office, while the country is fac-
ing health and economic crises. People are becoming 
destitute, even those who see themselves as mid-
dle-class. Many are struggling to even find enough 
food to eat, while the government through the 12th 
Malaysian Plan is planning to pump even more mon-
ey into a bloated bureaucracy, and crony businesses. 
The 2022 budget has been il-designed to deal with 
rampant inflation and rising unemployment.
Privilege is the nation’s number one enemy. This is 
the source of corruption, crony capitalism, abuses of 
power, and denying equal economic opportunity to 
all in Malaysia. This is the cause of an unprecedented 
rise in poverty. None of the new political movements 
or those advocating a reset for Malaysia have even 
identified this as the key problem to solve.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Malaysia:  
Permanent Ethnic Malay Polity 
Institutions put in place decades ago  
continue to shape the country’s  
political destiny
The February putsch of the ineffective and sabo-
taged Pakatan Harapan government by the make-
shift flag-of-convenience Perikatan Nasional, which 
is comprised of an alignment of Malay-centric polit-
ical parties, is the natural order for Malaysia, made 
possible by Machiavellian betrayal, a common trait 
in Malay politics since independence in 1957. 
Murray Hunter
What is very Malay about the grab for power cur-
rently underway in parliament is that the change of 
government was not as a result of a defeat at the polls 
or on the floor of the parliament, but rather a de-
cision made by the traditional Malay patriarch, the 
Yang Di-Pertuan Agong – the current king, Sultan 
Abdullah Sultan Ahmad. 
The structure and fabric of Malaysian power are 
made up of a patriarchal elite Malay hierarchy. At the 
top are the royal families, which yield a symbolic cul-
tural authority. Next are the long-established politi-
cal families who have been involved at the forefront 
of politics and government since independence. Next 
is a network of political warlords spreading down to 
the village level. These warlords operate under the 
patronage and in-turn provide support to the leaders 
of the political families. 
Alongside these groups are lines of Islamic clerics, 
who create religious legitimacy. Then comes a large 
sway of civil servants whose loyalty is to the Malay 
agenda rather than the government of the day and 
who caused chaos for the multiracial Pakatan Hara-
pan government. Connected professionals and busi-
nesspeople complete the make-up of the Malay gen-
try. 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Malaysia, once seen as a multicultural nation, has 
been incrementally traveling down the path of mon-
oculturalism. In 1957, Chinese comprised about 40 
percent of the population. That has shrunk to about 
23 percent today. Any ideas promoting a true mul-
ti-cultural Malaysia were politically resisted.  
One of the founders of the United Malays Na-
tional Organization, Onn Ja’afar, called for UMNO 
membership to be open for all races and renaming 
the party the United Malayan National Organiza-
tion. That wasn’t accepted by UMNO regional war-
lords, forcing Onn Ja’afar to leave UMNO and form a 
non-communal Independence Party of Malaya Party 
in 1951. Lee Kwan Yew called for the discriminatory 
section of the Malaysian constitution providing for 
special provisions for the Malays to be scraped, with 
a vision of a Malaysian Malaysia. Lee fell into conflict 
with then Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman, 
with the result that Singapore was expelled from Ma-
laysia in 1965. 
The masterpiece of social engineering was the for-
mulation and enactment of the New Economic Pol-
icy (NEP), in 1971, in response to the bloody race 
riots on May 13, 1969, that took hundreds of lives, 
the nation was socially engineered towards a mono-
Murray Hunter
cultural state. The formal intention was to bring Ma-
lays on par with other races, specifically in economic 
matters. However, then Prime Minister Tun Abdul 
Razak and following administrations extended NEP 
principles across all aspects of society, including, 
quotas in the civil service, education, the military 
forces, the formation of special purpose government 
agencies, and even discounts on buying properties. 
Positive discrimination for Malays has become deep-
ly institutionalized and has deep influence upon the 
nature of Malaysian society today.
Three generations of Malays have now been ed-
ucated through the local system, which has rewrit-
ten history to espouse the justification of their spe-
cial privileges. Islam has been reframed to become 
a tool of exclusion, rather than a doctrine of social 
inclusion. The psyche of Malays today is much more 
insular than it was 30 years ago. Language and greet-
ings have been Arabized, which has separated Ma-
lays even more from other ethnic groups. The Malay 
monoculture is now the norm. 
The Malaysian civil service is deeply embedded 
with Malay cultural practices and ethics. The so-
called “Malay agenda” is seen over by an elite appa-
rat. The military forces have been purged of ethnic 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
diversity, and a politicalized reserve of senior officers 
is in place. Academics and administrative staff of 
Malaysia’s public universities are primarily Malay. 
Government-linked companies and sovereign cor-
porations like Petronas, Sime Darby and Khazanah 
are filled with Malay professionals. 
The economy is skewed towards favoring Malay in-
terests through monopoly, regulation and the domi-
nance of GLCs in particular sectors. The legal system 
also appears rigged to favor the elite as was seen in 
the recent incident in which Riza Aziz, the stepson 
of the disgraced former Prime Minister Najib Razak, 
escaped prosecution for his part in the 1MDB scan-
dal. Now the narrative is changing over the Najib 
case, with the defense are saying public opinion is 
heavily against conviction despite the loss of US$4.8 
billion in the scandal. 
There are two streams of Islam that are reinforcing 
polarization. One is overt, full of rhetoric, the po-
litical Islam of the rural fundamentalist Parti Islam 
se-Malaysia or PAS, inspired by the Muslim Broth-
erhood. This rhetoric appeals to the souls of Malays, 
who are all Muslims. Islam is a powerful part of the 
persona in which any mockery towards Islam is usu-
ally framed as an attack on Malays. 
Murray Hunter
A bogeyman has been created, a mythical evil, 
which is the enemy of Malays portrayed and defend-
ed by groups, in the image of the old Malay warriors. 
A recent Malay Dignity Congress was a rallying of 
the elite Malays to defend the interests of the weak. 
The calls to ban alcohol by PAS, and subsequent 
statements by ministers are overt proclamations of 
Malaysia’s monoculture. Likewise, former deputy 
prime minister Wan Azizah Wan Ismail, who raised 
controversy in 2018 over her objections to child mar-
riage, indicated the strong influence of political Is-
lam on Malay society.
Thus, open discussion about special privileges and 
the Malay agenda is deemed sensitive to Malays. The 
mythology of the social contract has become sacred. 
Its manifestation as Ketuanan Melayu or Malay su-
premacy will come down hard, through intimida-
tion, on anyone brave enough to question it.   
The second stream of Islam is covert. Individuals 
who have returned from studying in the Middle East, 
or UK, have formed an influential alumni always 
looking to further the cause of Islam within their 
spheres of influence at the workplace. The alumni 
have infiltrated the civil service, education system, 
military, GLCs, and Islamic organizations such as 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
IKRAM. Muhyiddin Yassin has sought support from 
the organization’s de facto leader, the Perlis Mufti, 
Dr. Asri Zainul Abidin, known as Dr. Maza. 
Since independence, political control has been 
concentrated within a few elite Malay families. Ma-
laysia’s second prime minister Tun Abdul Razak’s son 
Najib Razak was also a serving prime minister and 
remains extremely powerful within UMNO today 
despite the 1MDB scandal. Onn Ja’afar’s son Hussein 
Onn became the third Malaysian prime minister. 
Hussein Onn’s son Hishammuddin Hussein is still 
powerful within UMNO and served as minister for 
defense, transport, home affairs, and youth and cul-
ture respectively. Khairy Jamaluddin, the current de-
fense minister, is the son in law of former prime min-
ister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi. Mahathir Mohamed’s 
son Mukhriz Mahathir was the Kedah chief minister 
twice and former minister of international trade. 
Anwar Ibrahim was deputy prime minister, his 
wife Wan Azizah Wan Ismail was also a deputy prime 
minister, while their daughter Nurul Izzah Anwar is 
a member of parliament. In addition, members of 
these elite families are intermarried to each other, 
royalty, diplomats, judges, and other senior Malays. 
These dynasties also exist at regional political war-
Murray Hunter
lord level, as is the case with former minister and 
parliamentary member for Arau, Shahidan Kassim, 
whose brother Ismail Kassim is involved in local 
state politics. There is also a mixture of mutual busi-
ness interests, and opaque influence. 
When Pakatan Harapan defeated the Barisan Na-
sional in the May 2018 national election, part of this 
elite grouping took power in a different configura-
tion. The administration of the current beleaguered 
Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin is yet just a recon-
figuration of the same people. Malay politics is more 
about the dynamics of these families than about pol-
icy and ideology. Malay politics has been primarily 
about feuds and alliances rather than vision. 
These family dynamics pose questions. The Sar-
awak Report recently claimed that the present fi-
nance minister Tengku Zafrul, reportedly a relative 
of Muhyiddin, played a role with the palace when 
the king was making a decision on whom to support. 
The truth of this will remain a secret of the elite. 
The grip of elite families on Malaysian politics has 
squeezed out potential new political talent and lead-
ership. Muhyiddin’s cabinet is not based upon mer-
itocracy but rather support, patronage and payback. 
It’s a configuration of political elite and warlords. 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
There is no shared ideology or vision binding them 
together. 
Structural and institutional factors combined will 
ensure Malaysia will remain a monocultural Malay 
state. As Malay birth rates have far exceeded those 
of other racial groups, the Malays are the dominant 
grouping in the country. The first-past-the-post elec-
toral system ensures that only representatives with 
polarized views will win a majority in single-member 
constituencies. The electoral system is biased against 
bringing diversity into the parliament. 
The two electoral wildcards Sabah and Sarawak 
have historically shown that political groupings 
there, also follow patronage politics. Malaysia is real-
ly Malaya plus two (Sabah and Sarawak) today. The 
Chinese-dominated Democratic Action Party has 
been banished to Penang, which will remain the par-
ty’s only sphere of influence. 
The Malay elite are yet to complete their fight for 
power. The demise of the Barisan Nasional destroyed 
the country’s political stability, which the multicul-
tural Pakatan Harapan was unable to replace. It was 
only able to disturb the Malay political paradigm in 
the 2018 general election due to special circumstanc-
es – a vengeful former and future Prime Minister 
Murray Hunter
Mahathir Mohamad on a crusade against a corrupt 
Najib. 
Once again, there will be a fierce Malay political 
fight in a Malay state over the coming months, with 
the winner to take all.   
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
How Malaysia’s Robber Barons  
Operate With Impunity 
Mahathir and Anwar’s legacy
The term robber baron was originally made aware 
to me by educator and writer Dr Azly Rahman. Rob-
ber baron is a derogative US term to describe how 
the powerful 19th Century American industrial-
ists and financiers made fortunes by monopolizing 
industries through engaging in unethical business 
practices, exploiting workers, and paying little heed 
to the law. These were the elite of the US at the time, 
and Malaysia has its very own class of robber barons, 
conceptualized and created by former prime minis-
ter Mahathir Mohamed during his first term of office. 
Murray Hunter
Creating a kleptocratic state
Mahathir with his then protégé Anwar Ibrahim 
turned Malaysia into a crony capitalist state. They 
attempted to create a Malay entrepreneurial class 
in a failed feat of social engineering. Mahathir pro-
vided selected cronies with exclusive opportunities, 
licensed monopolies, and exclusive market rights. 
Some major state assets like the national airline 
MAS were privatised without transparency, building 
a rent-seeking rather than an entrepreneurial class. 
People like Halim Saad, Tajuddin Ramli, Vincent 
Tan, and Syed Mokhtar Al-Bukhary, just to name a 
few, were greatly enriched not because of their busi-
ness prowess and innovation, but simply because be-
ing allies to the ruling class gave them market exclu-
sivity. 
The same thing happened to Malaysia’s government 
owned corporations or GLCs. These companies are 
established to enjoy monopolies or near monopolies 
across many industries, while being managed with-
out much transparency. 
The USD 4.5 billion financial scandal of the state-
owned sovereign fund 1MDB, according to the US 
Justice Department funded the financial activities 
of convicted felon and former prime minister Najib 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Razak and his cohorts. This misuse of public funds 
is only the tip of the iceberg. In fact, focus upon the 
1MDB financial scandal has effectively covered up 
abuses and misallocation of public funds across all 
sectors of government. Corruption within GLCs 
and other so called independent agencies are the 
gravy-train of many ex-politicians and cronies. The 
sad reality is that most of these scandals never reach 
public knowledge, as they are hidden and hushed up 
within government.  
This type of patronage is perpetuating a crony 
economy run by robber barons and their collabora-
tors. On many occasions sovereign funds GLCs like 
Khazanah Nasional Berhad and Permodalan Na-
sional Berhad act as lifeguards to bail-out those rob-
ber barons in trouble. This happened to Halim Saad’s 
Renong back in 2001, Tajuddin Ramli’s MAS in 2000, 
and even bailed out a failed online lingerie venture. 
Other GLCs like state economic development corpo-
rations assist ruling parties during elections to main-
tain power. 
Mahathir and Anwar’s legacy today is an econo-
my, where many sectors are controlled by large cor-
porations, through monopolies, restricted licenses, 
import permits, and exclusive rights to operate. Ma-
Murray Hunter
laysia today is full of oligopolies that operate their 
businesses as rent-seekers rather than astute custom-
er oriented entrepreneurial corporations. 
For years buying an imported car was out of the 
question due to the high import duties levied on cars 
to protect Mahathir’s vision of the national car Pro-
ton. Toll fees from secret concessions make travel-
ling by road the most expensive exercise within the 
region. The capital’s LRT system had to be bailed out 
to keep cronies afloat. The interstate bus system is 
controlled by cronies. Internet costs are some of the 
most expensive in the region due to cronyism. 
This momentum if not checked with market dereg-
ulation, and opening up sectors to free competition 
will hinder future economic development and diver-
sity. 
However, the opposite is occurring. Further restric-
tions are being applied across a number of industries 
to eliminate free competition. The freight forwarding 
industry is the latest sector under attack by the rob-
ber barons. Existing companies are being forced to 
sell out to Bumiputra interests, with the enforcement 
of race base equity rules. One can be assured, it won’t 
be the moms and pops of the Malay heartlands that 
benefit from this. The robber barons will move in.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Ministries are mini kingdoms 
Malaysia with 27 ministries and even more agen-
cies and statutory bodies can be seen as a network 
of independent mini-kingdoms. They are ruled by a 
minister or director general, usually a civil servant, 
with a sense of absolute power over their respective 
domains. Where ministries have deputy ministers, 
certain sections of the ministry fall under the deputy 
to administrate. 
Ministries, seen in the paradigm of kingdoms, goes 
some way to explaining why a minister is such a cov-
eted position. Likewise, within the states, the Menteri 
Besar or chief minister has almost absolute authority 
in making decisions in regards to matters under state 
responsibility. Land being one of the most important.
For a minister, director general or chief minister 
to be able to rule with maximum authority, he or she 
must employ two strategies, sometimes simultane-
ously. 
The first is patriarchy like a feudal lord who works 
within a hierarchy of influence and loyalty to gov-
ern. In order to obtain and maintain loyalty, the ruler 
must dish out economic opportunities to members 
of the hierarchy to maintain favour and authority. 
Murray Hunter
The second approach is a Machiavellian one, where 
the ruler must apply political tactics, both overt and 
covert to embed their authority over the institution. 
Many rulers find constant challenges, undermining, 
and even sabotage against their authority, and hence 
rule with an iron first. 
As prime minister Mahathir Mohamed did just 
that. He made new appointees sign a blank letter of 
resignation before taking the position. Mahathir also 
utilized Special branch resources to surveil, record 
and even film embarrassing situations that could 
lead to the end of a political career very suddenly, 
if they fell out of favour. It’s strongly speculated that 
Anwar and other politicians have fallen into honey 
traps to keep in check any ambitions of more power. 
One of the most powerful enablers within the Ma-
laysian government and civil service is the school 
tie network. This enables like minded politicians to 
launch and develop business projects where mutu-
al interest is the same among closely knit groups. 
The same school tie network protects many of these 
top politicians and civil servants, as there is a deep 
culture of protecting their own, no matter what was 
done wrong.
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Once a minister or top civil servant has a friend-
ly environment, many initiatives for self-benefit can 
be undertaken. These range from promoting major 
infrastructure development projects where money 
can be siphoned off through the employment of their 
own companies as contractors, fixing tenders for 
selected contractors to win, collecting donations or 
straight out bribes for positive decisions affecting the 
benefactors, contracting work out to their preferred 
suppliers, and manipulating land deals. 
A minister’s or civil servant’s financial interests are 
held by proxy directors and shareholders. A minis-
ter’s or civil servant’s name will never appear on any 
official paperwork. Usually a lifelong trusted friend, 
friend of a friend, or member of the extended family 
will hold shares and directorships, or trust to them. 
Sometime sophisticated overseas trust companies 
might be used, where funds are channelled for re-
tirement. 
During the years that UMNO dominated gov-
ernment, ex-politicians and favoured civil servants 
were appointed to agencies and GLCs to continue 
running a corporate empire that is far beyond any 
public transparency. For example, disgraced former 
Melaka chief minister Abdul Rahim Thamby Chik 
Murray Hunter
held the position of chairman of the Rubber Industry 
Smallholders Development Authority (RISDA) from 
2010-2015, and now is the executive director of the 
Gagasan Badan Ekonomi Melayu (GABEM). 
Ministries and agencies also have mini-feudal-
doms 
The robber barons at the top also have their min-
ions emulating their examples at department level. 
Department heads and officers develop different 
schemes to add to their wealth, according to the na-
ture of their department’s scope of responsibilities 
and work. 
This could be as simple as directing all vehicle re-
pairs to a certain bengkel or repairer. Officers may 
set up proxy companies to supply stationary, service 
equipment, or even cater for functions. Those depart-
ments serving ministers on development projects 
may even set up project management companies to 
implement projects. These are wide and varied and 
amount to the leakage of billions of Ringgit from the 
government coffers each year. 
If the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission 
(MACC) statistics are examined, only a very small 
proportion, most probably less than one percent are 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
ever investigated, or face any disciplinary action. 
Civil servants understand, if they cover their tracks 
well, and keep favour with superiors, they will never 
get caught. The current case of Azam Baki, the chief 
commissioner of the MACC indicates how staunch-
ly Malaysia’s institutional system of governance pro-
tects their own. There are hundreds of cases of top 
civil servants under investigation for corruption that 
led nowhere. 
Robber barons control more than 30 percent of 
the Malaysian economy
The objective of the New Economic Policy (NEP) 
was to put 30 percent of equity into the hands of Bu-
miputeras. Sadly, it didn’t achieve that, the NEP put 
30 percent of the economy into the hands of the rob-
ber barons. 
The 12th Malaysian Plan has been written to en-
sure a continuation of this trend. The advocation of 
setting up an aerospace cluster is just a thinly dis-
guised plan to put more equity into the hands of the 
robber barons, who already control much of the me-
dia, telecommunications, transport, plantation, and 
other service industries. 
The ailment of robber barons controlling sparse 
Murray Hunter
sectors of the economy is inefficiency. This holds back 
growth and equity, further concentrating wealth into 
the hands of a privileged few. There is a rent-seek-
er culture rather than an environment of innovation 
around business in the country. 
With the robber baron class so integrated with the 
ruling classes, this sinister institution plaguing the 
Malaysian nation state and economy will be almost 
impossible to dismantle. 
Even if the top corporations were taken out of the 
hands of the elite, it would take many years to clean up 
the agencies and ministries run by the minions who 
are profiteering without restraint. Even if the MACC 
wasn’t corrupt itself, it would need massive resources 
and incorruptible officers to sweep out Malaysia’s in-
stitutions of government. Without a strongly moral 
based education system to teach the next generation 
that corruption is evil and against every religion, the 
cause is a hopeless one.
The personal wealth of former prime minister 
Mahathir Mohamed’s children is rarely questioned, 
as are other former politicians. Mirzan, Mokhza-
ni, Mukhriz, and Marina are all extremely wealthy 
with significant assets and seats on company boards. 
Other members of the extended family control listed 
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
companies in construction and hotels. Former prime 
minister Hajib Razak’s family has great wealth and 
involved across many businesses, and many former 
ministers and high ranking civil servants have sub-
stantial business interests. 
One can see the reluctance of the government to 
pursue any hints of corruption with impunity, as we 
see with the half-heartedness in the investigation of 
former Bank Negara Malaysia governor Zeti Akhtar 
Aziz. It’s amazing Malaysia is still placed 62 on the 
Transparency International Corruption Perceptions 
Index 2021. Expect Malaysia’s ranking to continue 
falling. 
Murray Hunter
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
Malaysia’s Deep Corruption
The evolution of the Malaysian Deep State
Murray Hunter
Ovi Magazine Publishing: July 2023
Ovi magazine  
Design: Thanos
An Ovi Magazine Books Publication
      2023 Ovi Project Publication - All material is copyright of the Ovi magazine & the writerC
Ovi books are available in Ovi magazine pages and they are for free. 
If somebody tries to sell you an Ovi book please contact us immediately. 
For details, contact: submissions@ovimagazine.com 
or: ovimagazine@yahoo.com 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced 
into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior permission of the writer or the above publisher of this book.
Murray Hunter
Mu r r ay  Hu n te r
Deep 
Corruption
T h e  e v o l u t i on  of  t h e  Ma l ay s i a n  D e e p  St ate
Murray has been around the traps of entrepreneurship for too 
long. He is a long time expat from Australia who has made Ma-
laysia his home and tried his hand at everything from agriculture 
to computers, to food, to spas and to cosmetics.
Now he is taking the easy life as an associate professor at Univer-
sity Μalaysia Perlis. Murray spends half his time in Thailand and 
the other half looking for opportunities in Malaysia. Murray is 
passionate and deadly earnest about entrepreneurship and believes everybody should have 
the chance to “have a go”. 
Murray’s columns focus on giving some simple and practical ideas about the game of entre-
preneurship and personal development based on his immense experience and the insights. 
His pleasure is your success.
More books from Murray Hunter
